anathematize \uh-NATH-uh-muh-tyze\	verb 1. To pronounce an ecclesiastical ban or curse upon (one who is being excommunicated). 2. To denounce; curse.
amok \uh-MUCK or uh-MOCK\	adverb 1. In a murderously frenzied state. 2. a) In a violently raging manner b) In an undisciplined, uncontrolled, or faulty manner.
adamantine \ad-uh-MAN-teen or ad-uh-MAN-tine\	"adjective 1. Rigidly firm; unyielding. 2. Resembling the diamond in hardness or luster. [From Middle English, from Old French adamaunt, from Latin adamas, adamant, hard metal, steel, diamond, etc., from Greek adamas, adamant, a- not + daman, to conquer.] ""They become adamantine critics whose distrust of power (governmental power, at any rate) is absolute."" - David Aaronovitch, Excuse Me, But What's Wrong With Being Pro-Government?, The Independent (London, UK) Dec 24, 1999."
Aesopian \ee-SOH-pee-un or ee-SAH-pee-un\	adjective 1. Of, relating to, or characteristic of Aesop or his fables 2. Conveying an innocent meaning to an outsider but a hidden meaning to a member of a conspiracy or underground movement
aerie \AIR-ee or EER-ee\	noun 1. The nest of a bird on a cliff or a mountaintop. 2. An elevated often secluded dwelling, structure, or position.
affable \A-fuh-bul\	adjective 1. Being pleasant and at ease in talking to others. 2. Characterized by ease and friendliness.
adulate \AD-juh-layt or AD-yuh-layt\	"verb To flatter or admire slavishly. [Back-formation from adulation, from Latin adulari (to flatter, to fawn upon, like a dog wagging its tail). Earliest documented use: 1777; adulation is from around 1400.] ""Media will continue to adulate and fawn before celebrities' feet, like abject courtiers in an imperial palace."" - Kevin Myers; The Words 'Celebrity' and 'Ireland' Belong in the Same Sentence; Irish Independent (Dublin, Ireland); Sep 30, 2010."
abide \uh-BYDE\	verb 1. Tolerate. 2. To accept without objection. 3. a) To remain stable or fixed in a state b) To continue in a place.
bildungsroman \BIL-doongs-roh-mahn\	"noun A novel about the moral and psychological growth of the main character. [""Bildungsroman"" is the combination of two German words: ""Bildung,"" meaning ""education,"" and ""Roman,"" meaning ""novel."" Fittingly, a ""bildungsroman"" is a novel that deals with the formative years of the main character -- in particular, his or her psychological development and moral education. The bildungsroman usually ends on a positive note with the hero's foolish mistakes and painful disappointments over and a life of usefulness ahead. Goethe's late 18th-century work Wilhelm Meisters Lehrjahre (Wilhelm Meister's Apprenticeship) is often cited as the classic example of this type of novel. Though the term is primarily applied to novels, in recent years, some English speakers have begun to apply the term to films that deal with a youthful character's coming-of-age.] “Divided into three parts, the bildungsroman follows Lizzie from her teenage years in a Catholic boarding school to a summer in Paris as an au pair, to her first year of freedom as an adult in Dublin.” - Sarah Gilmartin; A Woman’s Take on Chauvinistic and Grim 1970s Ireland; The Irish Times (Dublin); Dec 6, 2014."
caparison \kuh-PAIR-uh-sun\	noun 1. a) An ornamental covering for a horse. b) Decorative trappings and harness. 2. Rich clothing: adornment.
anneal \uh-NEAL\	verb 1. To heat and then cool (as steel or glass) usually to make less brittle. 2. Strengthen, toughen.
arcadia \ahr-KAY-dee-uh\	noun A region or scene of simple pleasure and quiet.
ancilla \an-SIL-luh\	noun An aid to achieving or mastering something difficult.
"chthonic \THAH-nik (TH as in ""think"")\"	"adjective Of or relating to the underworld. [From Greek chthon (earth). Ultimately from the Indo-European root dhghem- (earth), which also sprouted human, homicide, humble, homage, chameleon, chamomile, inhume, exhume, and Persian zamindar (landholder). Earliest documented use: 1882.] ""The earth's crust is riddled with unresolved tensions -- prod, pierce or bend it enough and these chthonic stresses will find sudden release."" - Notes from Underground; The Economist (London, UK); Apr 21, 2012."
argy-bargy \ahr-jee-BAHR-jee or ahr-ghee-BAHR-ghee\	noun A lively discussion; argument, dispute
asperse \uh-SPERSS\	"verb 1. To sprinkle; especially to sprinkle with holy water. 2. To attack with evil reports or false or injurious charges. [""No sweet aspersion shall the heavens let fall / To make this contract grow."" In this line from Shakespeare's The Tempest, ""aspersion"" literally refers to a sprinkling of rain, but figuratively means ""blessing."" Shakespeare's use is true to the heritage of the term. ""Aspersion"" comes from the Latin word ""aspersus,"" itself a derivative of the verb ""aspergere,"" which means ""to sprinkle"" or ""to scatter."" When ""aspersion"" first appeared in English in the 16th century, it referred to the type of sprinklings (for instance, of holy water) that occur in religious ceremonies. But English speakers noted that splatterings can soil and stain, and by the end of the century ""aspersion"" was also being used for reports that stain or tarnish a reputation.] ""Then and in the war years that followed, EM Forster was a quiet but doughty spokesman for civil liberties, a fact forgotten now that it is fashionable to slight his fiction and asperse the nature of his sympathies for Britain's colonised."" - AC Grayling; The Last Word On - Freedoms; The Guardian (London, UK); Nov 24, 2001. ""Mr. Moon and his wife, Hak Ja Han, called the 'true parents' of mankind by his Unification Church, aspersed the couples with water as they passed in rows to the strains of Mendelssohn's Wedding March."" - Paul L. Montgomery; 4,000 Followers of Moon Wed at the Garden; The New York Times; Jul 2, 1982."
cerulean \suh-ROO-lee-un\	adjective Resembling the blue of the sky.
chockablock \CHAH-kuh-blahk\	adjective 1. Brought close together. 2. Very full.
brigadoon \brih-guh-DOON\	"noun A place that is idyllic, unaffected by time, or remote from reality. [From Brigadoon, a village in the musical of the same name, by Alan Jay Lerner and Frederick Loewe, based on the story Germelshausen by Friedrich Gerstacker. Brigadoon is under a spell that makes it invisible to outsiders except on one day every 100 years.] ""There is a feel of Brigadoon to Cooperstown, the lush village of baseball and opera tucked into the middle of an idyllic nowhere in upstate New York."" - Elisabeth Bumiller, Cooperstown, The New York Times, Jul 1, 2001."
auriferous \aw-RIH-fuh-russ\	adjective Containing gold.
Colonel Blimp \KER-nul-BLIMP\	"noun A pompous reactionary with out-of-date views. [After Colonel Blimp, a cartoon character created by David Low (1891-1963).] ""President Clinton and the bipartisan leadership of the House of Representatives are trying to grease the skids on which Puerto Rico can slide into statehood. After holding the Caribbean island as a colony for 100 years, it's about time. But it is dismaying to see the kind of opposition to statehood that is being aroused by the Colonel Blimps, the racists, the hate-the-poor crowd and the English-only zealots on the mainland."" - Carl Rowan, Let's Add Puerto Rico to Our Melting Pot, The Buffalo News, Mar 6, 1998."
augur \AW-gur\ (verb)	transitive verb 1. To foretell especially from omens. 2. To give promise of: presage. intransitive sense To predict the future especially from omens.
circumspect \SER-kum-spekt\	"adjective Careful to consider all circumstances and possible consequences: prudent. [Middle English, from Latin circumspectus, past participle of circumspicere, to take heed : circum-, + specere, to look.] ""A man's worth can be assessed in several ways, but for a truly candid appraisal, check with his creditors. At the usually circumspect World Bank, inquiries about Indian politician N.Chandrababu Naidu are likely to produce a string of superlatives."" - Maseeh Rahman, Asia: Beating Bangalore, Time International, 24 Aug 1998."
catachresis \kat-uh-KREE-suss\	"noun 1. The misuse of words. 2. Use of a forced and especially paradoxical figure of speech [Here's a catchall word for all those mixed metaphors and malapropisms. It derives via Latin from Greek katakhresthai (to misuse).] ""Our neighbors to the north aren't spared the disease of catachresis, either. A Canadian politician displayed this manifestation of the illness: 'If this thing starts to snowball, it will catch fire right across the country.'"" - Jaime O'Neill; A Verbal Ship Lost in a Sea of Words; San Francisco Chronicle; Sep 25, 2005."
Augean \aw-JEE-un\	"adjective Extremely difficult, unpleasant, filthy or filled with corruption. [After King Augeas in Greek mythology. Augeas had a herd of 3000 oxen, but he neglected to clean his stables for thirty years. Hercules was asked to clean them up, and he diverted two rivers to wash away the decades of accumulated compost. Earliest documented use: 1599.] ""Rajiv Gandhi gave an impression that he would clean the Augean stables that the Congress had come to represent."" - Game-Changer That Wasn't; The Pioneer (New Delhi, India); Sep 19, 2011."
bluestocking \BLOO-stock-ing\	noun 1. A woman with considerable scholarly, literary, or intellectual ability or interest. 2. A member of a mid-18th-century London literary circle: Lady Montagu was a celebrated bluestocking. ...if you rolled the whole group into one girl, she would be what Norine said — a rich, assured, beautiful bluestocking. - Mary McCarthy, The Group, 1963 She reads such deep books—all about facts and figures: she'll be quite a blue-stocking by and by. - Elizabeth Gaskell, Wives and Daughters, 1864-1866
borne \BORN\	adjective Transported or transmitted by -- used in combination
"bowdlerize \BOHD-luh-ryze or BOWD-luh-ryze (""OW"" as in ""cow"")\"	"verb To remove or change parts (of a book, play, movie, etc.) considered objectionable. [After Thomas Bowdler (1754-1825), a British doctor, who edited the Family Shakespeare, an expurgated edition of William Shakespeare's works. Bowdler believed the original wasn't suitable for the delicate sensibilities of women and children. He also edited other books, such as Edward Gibbon's Decline and Fall of the Roman Empire and the Old Testament in a similar manner.] ""The film [The Birth of a Nation] faced more courtroom challenges than any movie before or since, and many locales did ban or bowdlerize the movie."" - Gary Susman; Riot Acts; Entertainment Weekly; Nov 23, 2005."
callow \KAL-oh\	"adjective Inexperienced or immature. [From Old English calu (bald, featherless). Earliest documented use: before 1000.] ""Belva Davis was a young and callow rookie from a tiny black radio station in Oakland."""
baleful \BAIL-ful\	adjective 1. Deadly or pernicious in influence. 2. Foreboding evil: ominous.
appreciable \uh-PREE-shuh-bull or uh-PRIH-shuh-bull\	adjective Capable of being perceived or measured.
dissemble \dih-SEM-bul\	"verb To disguise one's intentions, thoughts, motives, etc. by pretense. [We don't have anything to hide: ""dissemble"" is a synonym of ""disguise,"" ""cloak,"" and ""mask."" ""Disguise"" implies a change in appearance or behavior that misleads by presenting a different apparent identity. ""Cloak"" suggests a means of hiding a movement or an intention. ""Mask"" suggests some often obvious means of hiding or disguising something. ""Dissemble"" (from Latin ""dissimulare,"" meaning ""to hide or conceal"") stresses the intent to deceive, especially about one's own thoughts or feelings, and often implies that the deception is something that would warrant censure if discovered. From Latin dis- (apart, away) + simulare (to simulate), from similis (like). Ultimately from the Indo-European root sem- (one) that is also the source of simultaneous, assemble, simple, Sanskrit sandhi (union), Russian samovar (a metal urn), and Greek hamadryad (a wood nymph).] ""So when should you be honest and when should you dissemble? 'You don't want to trick them and tell them later about the onions in the soup because they'll learn not to trust you,' advises Chambliss."" - Barbara Rowley; 7 Rules For a Peaceful Home; Parenting (San Francisco); Dec 2001/Jan 2002."
Croesus \KREE-suss\	noun A very rich man.
dudgeon \DUH-jun\	"noun A feeling of offense or resentment; anger. [""Dudgeon"" is today most often used in the phrase ""in high dudgeon"" (which in turn sometimes gives rise to playful variations such as ""middling dudgeon,"" ""intermediate dudgeon,"" ""towering dudgeon,"" ""lofty dudgeon,"" and so on). It's a mystery where the expression came from, however. (Conjectures as to a connection to a Welsh word, ""dygen,"" meaning ""malice,"" have no basis.) There does not appear to be any connection whatever to the very old ""dudgeon"" — a now obsolete term once used for a dagger or a kind of wood out of which dagger handles were made. But since at least 1573 curmudgeons and others have expressed their indignation with ""dudgeon."" Of unknown origin. Earliest documented use: 1380. This word is often used in the term ""in high dudgeon"" as in ""He went off in high dudgeon"" meaning ""He left in great anger and indignation.""] ""Germany's trade unions are in a state of considerable dudgeon about plans to cut state spending and squeeze the welfare state. The dudgeon will grow if more deficit-cutting consigns more of their members to the ranks of the unemployed."" Brian Beedham, Why Kohl Should Accept Postponement of Monetary Union, The International Herald Tribune (France), Apr 8, 1997."
contretemps \KAHN-truh-tahn or kone-truh-TAHN\	noun An inopportune or embarrassing occurrence or situation.
diaphanous \dye-AF-uh-nuhss\	"adjective 1. Transparent, light, or delicate. 2. Vague or hazy. [From Latin diaphanus (transparent), from Greek diaphanes, from diaphainein (to show through), from dia- (across) + phainein (to show). Ultimately from the Indo-European root bha- (to shine) that is also the source of beacon, banner, phantom, photo, phosphorus, phenomenon, fantasy, and epiphany.] ""In its main sale of the week, the house will offer five watercolors by Turner spanning his career, including the late picture 'The Brunig Pass from Meiringen, Switzerland', a whirlwind of diaphanous color and light."" - Above and Beyond; The New Yorker; Feb 2, 2009."
descry \dih-SKRYE\	verb 1. To catch sight of. 2. Find out, discover.
eldritch \EL-drich\	adjective Weird, eerie.
dilettante \DIH-luh-tahnt or DIH-luh-tant\	"noun One who takes up an activity or interest in a superficial or casual way. adjective Superficial; amateurish. [From Italian dilettante (amateur), from Latin delectare (to delight). Earliest documented use: 1733.] ""I long ago came to realize that I am a putterer, a grazer, a dilettante. I create the impression of getting a lot done by dabbling through my days: I read two pages of a book, write half a letter, paint a portion of the front porch, bake half a tin of muffins, teach a class, wash a window."""
delectation \dee-leck-TAY-shun or dih-leck-TAY-shun\	noun Delight, enjoyment.
demotic \di-MAH-tik\	"adjective Common, popular. [Greek demotikos, from demotes, a commoner, from demos, people.] ""His (Francesco Zolla) admirers responded to the epic component, rare in his time: epic in its demotic rhetoric, in its commonplaces, in its preference for collective scenes and tidal movements, epic finally in the excitement it provoked among the rising or aspiring lower classes-- teachers, artisans, clients of popular libraries, buyers of cheap popular editions."" - Weber, Eugen, Zola: A Life (book reviews), The New Republic, 31 Jul 1995."
demarche \day-MAHRSH or dih-MAHRSH\	"noun A course of action, especially a diplomatic petition or protest. [From French démarche (gait). Ultimately from the Indo-European root merg- (border) that's also the source of marquee, margin, march, mark, and remark.] ""Beijing sent Canberra a formal diplomatic protest in May -- not about the Dalai Lama but over a perception that Australia, the US, Japan and India are cobbling together a security alliance to contain China. The Chinese demarche is an acute example of the type of problem Australian policymakers will continue to face."" - Great and Powerful -- But is China Our Friend? The Age (Melbourne, Australia); Jun 18, 2007."
"distrait \dih-STRAY (the final ""t"" is silent)\"	"adjective Inattentive or preoccupied, especially because of anxiety. [Middle English, from Old French, past participle of distraire, to distract, from Latin distrahere.] ""The King is distrait, the Fool has been trying to distract him."" - Saying it without words, New Straits Times, 10 Dec 1997."
convivial \kun-VIV-ee-ul\	adjective Relating to, occupied with, or fond of feasting, drinking, and good company.
engender \in-JEN-der or en-JEN-der\	verb 1. Beget, procreate 2. To cause to exist or to develop: produce 3. To assume form: originate
didactic \dye-DAK-tik\	"adjective 1. Intended to teach, particularly in having moral instruction as an ulterior motive. 2. In the manner of a teacher, particularly so as to appear patronizing. [Greek didaktikos, skillful in teaching, from didaktos, taught, from didaskein, didak-, to teach, educate.] ""Tt might be argued that literature has only very rarely represented character. Even the greatest novelists, such as Dostoevsky and Tolstoy, resort to stock caricature, didactic speaking over characters, repetitive leitmotifs, and so on. The truly unhostaged writer, such as Chekhov, is rare."" James Wood, Human, all too inhuman, New Republic, Jul 24, 2000."
comptroller \kun-TROH-ler or KAHMP-troh-ler\	noun 1. A royal-household official who examines and supervises expenditures. 2. A public official who audits government accounts and sometimes certifies expenditures. 3. The chief accounting officer of a business or institution.
dolorous \DOH-luh-russ or DAH-luh-russ\	adjective Causing, marked by, or expressing misery or grief.
edacious \ih-DAY-shuss\	"adjective Devouring; voracious. [From Latin edere (to eat). Ultimately from the Indo-European root ed- (to eat, to bite) that has given other words such as edible, comestible, obese, etch, fret, and postprandial.] ""For too many years my edacious reading habits had been leading me into one unappealing corner after another, dank cul-de-sacs littered with tear-stained diaries, empty pill bottles, bulging briefcases, broken vows, humdrum phrases, sociological swab samples, and the (lovely?) bones of dismembered children."" - Tom Robbins; In Defiance of Gravity; Harper's (New York); Sep 2004."
doughty \DOW-tee\	"adjective Marked by fearless resolution: valiant. [""Doughty"" is a persevering Old English word. Its earliest form was ""dyhtig,"" but early on, the vowel changed, and the word became ""dohtig."" That was probably due to influence from a related Old English word, ""dohte,"" that meant ""had worth."" By the 13th century, the spelling ""doughty"" had begun to appear. The expected pronunciation would be \DAW-tee\, paralleling other similarly spelled old words like ""bought"" and ""sought."" But over the centuries, the spelling was sometimes confused with that of the now obsolete word ""doubty"" (full of doubt), and thus, so it is conjectured, we have the pronunciation we use today.]"
conurbation \kah-ner-BAY-shun\	"noun A large urban area involving several contiguous communities, formed as a result of expansion of neighboring areas. [From con- (together, with) + Latin urb- (city) + -ation.] ""Anxious to consolidate St Petersburg as a conurbation, Peter the Great forced his nobles to build second houses on the plots of land he gave them just outside the city."" - Books And Arts: Country Life; The Russian Summer House; The Economist (London, UK); Jun 21, 2003. ""With the conurbation of shanty towns emerging in the area like mushrooms, very soon it might take hours to cross the area. And who says this is the way to develop a city or a nation?"" - S.B. Akuffo; The Land Use Mess at Kasoa; Accra Mail (Ghana); Oct 03, 2002."
emote \ih-MOHT\	"verb To give expression to emotion especially in acting. [""Emote"" is an example of what linguists call a back-formation — that is, a word formed by trimming down an existing word (in this case, ""emotion""). From the time ""emote"" was coined in the early 20th century, its use has tended to be less than entirely serious. It most often appears in humorous or deprecating descriptions of the work of actors. It is similarly used to describe theatrical behavior by nonactors, as in this passage by David Fontana, published in The New Republic on March 11, 2012: ""We might not want our president to emote about economics or war; but why shouldn't a fan, or for that matter a sports announcer, emote about athletics, which is not after all a matter of world historical importance?""Earliest recorded use: 1917.] ""Doctors are trained to always look serious and never emote."""
complaisant \kuhm-PLAY-sunt or kuhm-PLAY-zunt\	adjective 1. Marked by an inclination to please or oblige or by courteous agreeability. 2. Marked by a willingness to consent to others' wishes or to lend oneself compliantly to their purposes.
enjoinder \en-JOIN-der or in-JOIN-der\	noun 1. A command. 2. Interdiction, prohibition; often: injunction.
gainsay \GAYN-say\	"verb To oppose or contradict. [You might have trouble figuring out ""gainsay"" if you're thinking of our modern ""gain"" plus ""say."" It should help to know that the ""gain-"" part is actually related to ""against""—specifically the Old English word for ""against"": ""gēan-."" From that came Middle English ""gain-,"" which was joined with ""sayen"" (""say"") to form ""gainsayen,"" the Middle English predecessor of ""gainsay."" So when you see ""gainsay,"" think ""say against""—that is, ""deny"" or ""contradict.""] ""And there was something childlike about Griffith, too, even in his Matlock days, as a deceptively sharp 'simple country lawyer,' a big-kid boyishness that did not mask his intelligence or gainsay his authority."" — From an obituary for Andy Griffith in the Post & Courier (Charleston, South Carolina), July 7, 2012"
Grand Guignol \grahn-gheen-YAWL\	noun Dramatic entertainment featuring the gruesome or horrible.
furtive \FER-tiv\	adjective 1. a) Surreptitious b) Sly. 2. Stolen.
fulgent \FUL-jint\	adjective Dazzlingly bright: radiant.
fulminate \FULL-muh-nayt\	"verb 1. To utter or send out with denunciation. 2. To explode or to cause to explode. [From Latin fulminare (to strike with lightning), from fulmen (lightning), from fulgere (to shine). Ultimately from the Indo-European root bhel- (to shine or burn), which is also the source of blaze, blank, blond, bleach, blanket, flame, refulgent, and effulgent. Earliest documented use: 1500.] ""She would fulminate honestly against anything she didn't like."" - Robert Thirkell; Conflict; Bloomsbury; 2010. ""It was plain to see that her temper was delicately adjusted on a fulminate of mercury fuse."" - L. Ron Hubbard; The Chee-Chalker; Galaxy Press; 2008."
Grub Street \GRUB-street\	"noun The world or category of needy literary hacks. [In 17th century London, Grub Street near Moorfields was the place to find impoverished writers. Even though this street was renamed Milton Street in 1830, the world of hack writers is still known as Grub Street. The inhabitants of this now metaphorical place churn out words without any regard for their literary merit. They were often called penny-a-liners. A Grub Street writer is also called a hack writer, which is another London allusion: Hackney in East London, was the place where horses suitable for routine riding or driving were raised. The word hack, in related senses, is a short form of hackney.] ""To succeed in journalism, the late Nicholas Tomalin once wrote, you need three qualities: 'a ratlike cunning, a plausible manner, and a little literary ability'. ... There are still some aspects of the Grub Street trade that can be learnt with a little application."" - Stephen Jones; Times Educational Supplement; Nightmare on Grub Street; Sep 14, 2007."
ex cathedra \eks-kuh-THEE-druh\	adjective By virtue of or in the exercise of one's office or position [From Latin ex cathedra (from the chair), from cathedra (chair). In the Roman Catholic Church, when the Pope speaks ex cathedra he is considered infallible. The word cathedral is short for the full term cathedral church, meaning the principal church of a diocese, one containing a bishop's throne. NOTE: The term is often used ironically or sarcastically to describe self-certain statements, alluding to the Pope's supposed infallibility, as if an office or position conferred immunity from error.]
Götterdämmerung \guh(r)-tuhr-DEH-muh-rung or guh(r)-turh-DA-muh-rung\	"noun Complete destruction of an institution, regime, order, etc. [From German Götterdämmerung (twilight of the gods), from Götter, plural of Gott (god) + Dämmerung (twilight). Götterdämmerung was the name of the last of Richard Wagner's four operas titled Der Ring des Nibelungen (The Ring of the Nibelung). The German word Götterdämmerung is a translation of the Old Norse Ragnarök which in Scandinavian mythology refers to the destruction of the gods in a battle with evil, resulting in the end of the world. The term Ragnarök is from regin (gods) + rok (fate, course) confused by some with Ragnarökkr (literally, twilight of the gods).] ""What began as the exuberant union of two college-age strivers is coming to a devastating end after 18 years, and the Gotterdammerung is being fought out not in court but inside the couple's perfect house."" - Michelle Green; Dirty Divorcing; People (New York); Feb 19, 1990."
hastilude \HASS-tuh-lood\	noun A medieval joust: spear play.
gravamen \gruh-VAY-mun\	"noun The essence or the most serious part of an accusation. [""Gravamen"" is not a word you hear every day, but it does show up occasionally in modern-day publications. It comes from the Latin verb ""gravare,"" meaning ""to burden,"" and ultimately from the Latin adjective ""gravis,"" meaning ""heavy."" Fittingly, ""gravamen"" refers to the part of a grievance or complaint that gives it weight or substance. In legal contexts, ""gravamen"" is used, synonymously with ""gist,"" to refer to the grounds on which a legal action is sustainable. ""Gravis"" has given English several other weighty words, including ""gravity,"" ""grieve,"" and the adjective ""grave,"" meaning ""important"" or ""serious.""] ""The gravamen of James's charge against Flaubert is that he created no characters of sufficiently deep consciousness."" - Joseph Epstein; Writer's Block: A French Misconnection; The Wall Street Journal (New York); Mar 31, 2007."
eupeptic \yoo-PEP-tik\	adjective 1. Of, relating to, or having good digestion. 2. Cheerful, optimistic.
fulsome \FULL-sum\	"adjective 1. Effusive; lavish. 2. Excessive to the point of being offensive. [Does the word fulsome have a positive connotation or negative? Depends on whom you ask. The word started out in mid 13th century as a straightforward, unambiguous word to describe abundance. By the 17th century, it had acquired a deprecatory sense, as in the second sense listed above. Then, again, it went around the bend and in the 20th century the positive sense of the word become more common. Language purists continue to stick with the second sense, while others use the word in its first sense. What to do? Avoid it, unless context is clear, as in the two usage examples below.] ""Dacres offered Hull fulsome compliments on the courage and performance of his men."" - Ian W. Toll; Blood Brothers; The Economist (London, UK); Nov 4, 2006. ""One tires of the fulsome endorsement, the blizzard of exclamation points, the arch locutions."" - Daniel Aaron; Belle du Jour; The New Republic (Washington, DC); Feb 2, 1998."
gruntle \GRUN-tul\	verb To put in a good humor.
foursquare \FOR-SKWAIR\	"adjective 1. Firm; unyielding. 2. Frank; forthright. 3. Square in shape. adverb In a firm or forthright manner. [From four + square, from Latin exquadrare (to square). Earliest documented use: before 1300.] ""China does have one strength that this country lacks: a leadership foursquare behind modern science while America's carbon cavemen question the need for green energy."" - Froma Harrop; We're Indebted to an Unfriendly Nation; The Dallas Morning News (Texas); Dec 22, 2010."
hew \HYOO\	"verb 1. To cut or fell with blows (as of an ax). 2. To give shape to with or as if with an ax. 3. To conform, adhere. [""Hew"" is a strong, simple word of Anglo-Saxon descent. It can suggest actual ax-wielding, or it can be figurative: ""If ... our ambition hews and shapes [our] new relations, their virtue escapes, as strawberries lose their flavor in garden-beds"" (Ralph Waldo Emerson). It's easy to see how the figurative ""shape"" sense of ""hew"" developed from the literal hacking sense, but what does chopping have to do with adhering and conforming? That sense first appeared in the late 1800s in the phrase ""hew to the line."" The ""hew line"" is a line marked along the length of a log indicating where to chop in order to shape a beam. ""Hewing to the line,"" literally, is cutting along the mark—adhering to it—until the side of the log is squared] ""Typically at this point on the political calendar, a sitting vice president scrupulously downplays his interest in ascending to the top job.... Vice presidents as varied as Walter Mondale, George H.W. Bush, and Al Gore all gamely hewed to this script."" — From an article by Noam Scheiber in The New Republic, August 24, 2012"
hierophant \HYE-ruh-fant or hye-EH-ruh-funt\	noun 1. A priest in ancient Greece. 2. a) A commentator. b) An advocate.
expiate \EKS-pee-ate\	verb 1. To extinguish the guilt incurred by. 2. To make amends for.
ex parte \eks-PAR-tee\	"adverb or adjective Involving one side only. [From Latin ex parte (from a side).] ""A notice was served to the company but as no official turned up on its behalf, it was proceeded ex parte."" - Telephone Company Told to Pay Damages; The Times of India (New Delhi); Jan 13, 2009."
henotheism \HEN-uh-thee-iz-uhm\	"noun Belief in one god without denying the existence of others. [""Henotheism"" comes to us from the German word ""Henotheismus,"" which in turn is derived from the Greek ""hen-"" (""one"") plus ""theos"" (""god""). Someone who engages in henotheism worships one god as supreme over all others. Max Müller, a respected 19th-century scholar, is credited with promoting the word ""henotheism"" as a counterpart to ""polytheism"" (""belief in or worship of more than one god"") and ""monotheism"" (""the doctrine or belief that there is but one God""). Müller also offered the related word ""kathenotheism"" for the worship of several gods successively.] ""On the empirical side, Lind thinks he sees an accelerating pattern of religious indifferentism in this country; Americans, he argues, have adopted the henotheism of `one God and many equally true religions.' But the phenomenon Lind is trying to describe could much more accurately be thought of as a flourishing of religious tolerance--and one, moreover, that is morally grounded in religious convictions."" Weigel, George, The Next American Nation: The New Nationalism and the Fourth American Revolution. (book reviews), Commentary, 1 Jul 1995."
forebear \FOR-bair\ (noun)	noun Ancestor, forefather; also: precursor -- usually used in plural.
importune /im-pawr-TOON, im-pawr-TYOON, im-PAWR-chuhn/	"verb To ask someone, repeatedly or annoyingly, to do something. [From Latin importunus, from in- (not) + portus (port, refuge). Ultimately from the Indo-European root per- (to lead, pass over), which also gave us support, comport, petroleum, sport, passport, petrify, colporteur (a peddler of religious books), Swedish fartlek (a training technique), Norwegian fjord (bay), and Sanskrit parvat (mountain). Earliest documented use: 1530.] ""José Luis Rodríguez Zapatero, Spain's prime minister, has cast dignity aside and importuned all and sundry with a request to be invited to a conference."" - After the Fiesta; The Economist (London, UK); Nov 6, 2008. importunate \im-POR-chuh-nit or im-POR-tyoo-nit\ adjective 1. Overly persistent in request or demand. 2. Troublesome."
longueur \long-GUR\	noun A long and dull passage in a work of literature. [From French longueur (length), from Latin longus (long). Ultimately from the Indo-European root del- (long), which also gave us lounge, lunge, linger, longitude, long, belong, and along. Earliest documented use: 1791.] “Even the sainted Douglas Adams wasn’t above the occasional infuriatingly indulgent longueur, such as basing the whole of his least good book on an extended metaphor involving cricket.” - Euan Ferguson; And Another Thing; The Observer (London, UK); Oct 11, 2009.
hypocorism \hye-PAH-kuh-rih-zum or hye-puh-KOR-ih-zum\	"noun 1. A pet name. 2. The use of pet names. [From Greek hypokorisma (pet name), from hypo- (under) + kor- (child). Ultimately from Indo-European root ker- (to grow), which is also the source of other words such as increase, recruit, crew, crescent, cereal, concrete, crescendo, sincere, and Spanish crecer (to grow). Earliest documented use: 1850.] ""This must be an offshoot of my brother's enthusiasm for hypocorism. He was always inventing idiotic nicknames for people."" - Adam Davies; Goodbye Lemon; Riverhead; 2006."
hyperborean \hye-per-BOR-ee-un or hye-per-buh-REE-un\	adjective Of or relating to an extreme northern region or the people living there.
ingenuous \in-JEN-yu-wus\	adjective 1. Free from reserve, restraint, or dissimulation; candid; sincere. 2. Artless; innocent; naive. [From Latin ingenuus (honest, native, freeborn), from in- (in) + gignere (to beget).]
kibosh \KYE-bahsh or kih-BAHSH\	–noun Informal. 1. nonsense. —Idiom 2. put the kibosh on: to put an end to; squelch; check: Another such injury may put the kibosh on her athletic career.
marplot \MAHR-plaht\	"noun One who frustrates or ruins a plan by meddling. [Beginning in the 17th century, people liked to prefix ""mar-"" to nouns to create a term for someone who mars, or spoils, something. A mar-joy was bad enough, but even worse was a mar-all. Although today the word ""plot"" often carries an implication of secrecy or ill intent, the ""plot"" used in the formation of ""marplot"" simply meant ""a plan for the accomplishment of something."" A marplot, therefore, can really mess up a perfectly good thing. The word may not have been invented by English playwright Susannah Centlivre, but it first surfaces in print in her 1709 play The Busy Body. That title refers to a character named Marplot, who misguidedly gets in the way of the lovers in the play.] ""It was obvious that President Uribe, who certainly is no marplot, was looking for a fracas when he preemptively revoked Hugo Chavez's credentials to potentially negotiate a hostage swap."" — From a release by the Council on Hemispheric Affairs reported by the States News Service, January 10, 2008"
immure \ih-MYOOR\	"verb 1. To enclose within or as if within walls; imprison. 2. To build into a wall; especially : to entomb in a wall. [Like ""mural,"" ""immure"" comes from ""murus,"" a Latin noun that means ""wall."" ""Immurare,"" a Medieval Latin verb, was formed from ""murus"" and the prefix ""in-"" (meaning ""in"" or ""within""). ""Immure,"" which first appeared in English in the late 16th century, literally means ""to wall in"" or ""to enclose with a wall,"" but it has extended meanings as well. In addition to senses meaning ""imprison"" and ""entomb,"" the word sometimes has broader applications, essentially meaning ""to shut in"" or ""to confine."" One might remark, for example, that a very studious acquaintance spends most of her time ""immured in the library"" or that a withdrawn teenager ""immures himself in his bedroom every night.""] ""Rather, what fairy tales obsessively conjure up is a world of mutability, in which things and people are not immured in their nature. The frog becomes a prince, the wolf becomes a grandmother, the little mermaid becomes a woman, the beast becomes a handsome man, the 12 brothers become a flock of ravens."" — From a book review by Adam Kirsch in Prospect, August 23, 2012"
ignominy /IG-nuh-min-ee, ig-NOM-uh-nee/	"noun 1. Public disgrace. 2. Disgraceful quality or conduct. [Via French, from Latin ignominia. Ultimately from the Indo-European root no-men- (name) which also gave us name, anonymous, noun, synonym, eponym, renown, nominate, misnomer, and moniker. Earliest documented use: 1540.] ""Nor is JAL likely to suffer the ignominy of an immediate slump in the share price, as Facebook did after its IPO, analysts say."" - From Bloated to Floated; The Economist (London, UK); Sep 15, 2012."
infix \IN-fiks\	transitive verb To implant or impress.
ineffable \ih-NEH-fuh-bul\	adjective 1. a) Indescribable b) Unspeakable 2. Not to be uttered: taboo
majordomo \may-juhr-DOH-moh\	noun 1. A head steward of a large household (as a palace). 2. Butler, steward. 3. A person who speaks, makes arrangements, or takes charge for another.
jitney \JIT-nee\	noun A small bus that serves a regular route on a flexible schedule.
hors de combat \or-duh-kohn-BAH\	adjective or adverb Out of combat: disabled
impresario \im-pruh-SAHR-ee-oh\	"noun 1. An organizer, promoter, or manager of public entertainments, such as a ballet, opera, concert, or theater company. 2. Any manager or director. [From Italian impresario (one who undertakes a business), from impresa (undertaking), from Vulgar Latin imprendere (to undertake).] ""Shadowing him on the trip here - visible on the margins of events, usually staying out of sight - was Mr. Bush's political impresario, Karl Rove."" - David E. Sanger; Middle East Mediator: Big New Test for Bush; The New York Times; Jun 5, 2003. ""Even on Broadway, few stars have crashed as spectacularly as Garth Drabinsky, the impresario behind Ragtime, theatreland's highest-grossing show."" - From Riches to Ragtime; The Economist (London); Aug 15, 1998."
irascible \ir-RASS-uh-bull\	adjective Marked by hot temper and easily provoked anger.
hypothecate \hye-PAH-thuh-kayt\	"verb 1. To pledge to a creditor as security without delivering over; mortgage. 2. To put in pledge by delivery, as stocks given as security for a loan. [Hypothecate first entered English in the late 1600s, originally from the Greek roots hypo- and tithenai meaning ""to put down.""] Then you hypothecate your stock in company number one, and you had your dummy directors lend you more money, and you buy another trust company. - Upton Sinclair, The Moneychangers, 1920 He could buy certificates of city loan for the sinking-fund up to any reasonable amount, hypothecate them where he pleased, and draw his pay from the city without presenting a voucher. - Theodor Dreiser, The Financier, 1912"
kerfuffle \ker-FUH-ful\	noun [chiefly British] Disturbance, fuss.
hortative \HOR-tuh-tihv\	"adjective Giving exhortation; serving to advise or warn. [""We give nothing so freely as advice,"" observed French writer Duc de La Rochefoucauld in 1665. ""Hortative"" and ""exhort"" (meaning ""to urge earnestly"") are two words that testify to our eagerness to counsel others. Both trace to Latin ""hortari,"" meaning ""to urge."" ""Hortative"" has been used as both a noun (meaning ""an advisory comment"") and an adjective since the 17th century, but the noun is now extremely rare. You may also encounter the adjectives ""hortatory,"" ""exhortatory,"" and ""exhortative,"" all of which have the same meaning as ""hortative.""] ""But it's important to remember that 'Jersey Shore' is on MTV, a youth-oriented cable channel that has a hortative streak: series like 'Teen Mom' and 'If You Really Knew Me' carry a strong 'don't try this at home' message."" — From an article by Alessandra Stanley in The New York Times, August 20, 2010"
ingratiate \in-GRAY-shee-ayt\	"verb To gain favor or favorable acceptance for by deliberate effort -- usually used with ""with"""
mulct \MULKT\	verb 1. To punish by a fine. 2. a) To defraud especially of money: swindle b) To obtain by fraud, duress, or theft.
objurgation \ahb-jer-GAY-shun\	noun A harsh rebuke.
palimpsest \PAL-ump-sest or puh-LIMP-sest\	"noun 1. Writing material (as a parchment or tablet) used one or more times after earlier writing has been erased. 2. Something having usually diverse layers or aspects apparent beneath the surface. [From Greek palimpsestos, from palin (again) + psestos + (scraped). Earliest documented use: 1661 Also see pentimento.] ""All history was a palimpsest, scraped clean and re-inscribed exactly as often as was necessary."" - George Orwell; Nineteen Eighty-Four; 1949. ""Her memories, too, are a palimpsest of the real and the staged; their courting scenes in a play."" - Molly and the Playwright; The Economist (London, UK); Jun 24, 2010."
orchidaceous \or-kuh-DAY-shuss\	"adjective 1. Of or relating to orchids. 2. Showy, ostentatious. [From New Latin Orchidaceae (orchid family name), from Latin orchis (orchid), from Greek orkhis (testicle, orchid, from the shape of its tubers). Earliest documented use: 1838.] ""Arlene Dahl was and remains a real doll. The orchidaceous leading lady was one of the most beautiful women to ever grace MGM musicals."""
nudnik \NOOD-nik\	"noun A boring pest. [From Yiddish nudyen (to bore), from Polish nudzic + -nik (suffix denoting a person associated with a particular quality, group, etc.] ""John Kerry's freefall is so pronounced that even Dana Milbank, the Washington Post nudnik who specializes in needling President Bush on the most picayune details, has tossed Kerry overboard."" - Russ Smith; Kerry's Last Stand; New York Press; Dec 9, 2003. ""Alfred E. Neuman, the magazine's red-haired, freckle-faced, dentally challenged mascot, is famous for saying, 'What, me worry?' Alfred, the nudnik who has campaigned for U.S. president since 1956, should be worried."" - Tom Hawthorn; 'What, me advertise?': Mad Magazine Has a Legacy of Tweaking the Establishment; Vancouver Sun (Canada); Apr 17, 2001."
penury \PEN-yuh-ree\	noun 1. A severe lack of resources (as money). 2. Extreme frugality.
orotund \OR-uh-tund or AHR-uh-tund\	"adjective 1. Strong, clear, rich (as in voice or speech). 2. Pompous, bombastic. [Contraction of Latin ore rotundo (with a round mouth), from ore, from os (mouth) + rotundo, from rotundus (round), from Indo-European root ret- (to run or roll). Other words derived from the same root are rodeo, roll, rotary, rotate, rotund, roulette, and round.] ""No one today even tries to emulate the orotund, Latinate manner of Dr Johnson or Burke, except perhaps as a comic affectation."" - Edward Said; Living in Arabic; Al-Ahram Weekly (Cairo, Egypt); Feb 12, 2004. ""Beaming his broad smile, Geoffrey Holder sets a few baby lettuce leaves and a slice of tomato on a plate. 'You must take chances, ad lib, im-pro-viiiisse,' he says, his orotund voice caressing the last word."" - Dana Jacobi; Harmony in the Kitchen; Vegetarian Times (Glen Allen, Virginia); Jun 1, 2001."
pathos \PAY-thohss or PA-thohss\	noun 1. An element in experience or in artistic representation evoking pity or compassion. 2. An emotion of sympathetic pity.
philippic \fuh-LIH-pik\	noun A bitter condemnation, usually in a speech. [From Greek philippikos, the name given to orator Demosthenes's speeches urging Athenians to rise up against Philip II of Macedon. ]
pellucid \puh-LOO-sid\	"adjective 1. Admitting the maximum passage of light. 2. Clear; easy to understand. [From Latin pellucidus, from perlucere (to shine through), from per- (through) + lucere (to shine). Ultimately from the Indo-European root leuk- (light) that is also the source of other words such as lunar, lunatic, light, lucubrate, lightning, lucid, illuminate, illustrate, translucent, lux, and lynx.] ""Their [Dorothy Wordsworth's journals'] style, at times pellucid, at times opaque, lies somewhere between the rapture of a love letter and the portentousness of a thriller."" - Frances Wilson; The Ballad of Dorothy Wordsworth; Farrar, Straus and Giroux; 2008."
obverse \AHB-verss or ahb-VERSS\	noun 1. The side of a coin or currency note bearing the chief device and lettering; broadly: a front or principal surface. 2. A counterpart having the opposite orientation or force; also: opposite.
nugatory \NOO-guh-tor-ee\	adjective 1. Trifling, inconsequential. 2. Having no force: inoperative.
pelagic \puh-LAJ-ik\	adjective Relating to the open sea: oceanic.
nyctalopia \nik-tuh-LOH-pee-uh\	noun Night blindness.
muckety-muck \MUH-kuh-tee-muck\	noun An important and often arrogant person.
palooka \puh-LOO-kuh\	noun 1. An inexperienced or incompetent boxer 2. Oaf, lout
nictitate \NIK-tuh-tayt\	"verb To wink [""Nictitate"" didn't just happen in the blink of an eye; it developed over time as an alteration of the older verb ""nictate,"" which also means ""to wink."" Both verbs trace to the Latin word for winking, ""nictare."" The addition of the extra syllable was apparently influenced by Latin verbs ending in ""-itare,"" such as ""palpitare"" and ""agitare"" (which gave us ""palpitate"" and ""agitate,"" respectively). Today, ""nictitate"" has a special use in the animal world. Since the early 18th century, scientists have used ""nictitating membrane"" to describe the so-called ""third eyelid"": the thin, usually transparent membrane in the eyes of birds, fishes, and other vertebrates that helps keep the eyeball moist and clean.] ""Timothy developed a tic in his eyelid that caused it to nictitate on occasion."""
pied-a-terre \pee-ayd-uh-TAIR or pee-ayd-ah-TAIR\	noun A temporary or second lodging.
perspicuous \per-SPIH-kyuh-wus\	"adjective Clearly expressed; easy to understand. [From Latin perspicuus (transparent), from perspicere (to see through), from per- (through) + -spicere, combining form of specere (to look). Ultimately from the Indo-European root spek- (to observe), which is also the ancestor of such words as suspect, spectrum, bishop (literally, overseer), espionage, despise, telescope, spectator, speculum, and spectacles. Earliest documented use: 1570.] ""HAND also offers the most informed and perspicuous account of the political violence."" - Darfur Humanitarian Update; Sudan Tribune (Paris, France); Sep 1, 2010."
nonage \NAH-nij or NOH-nij\	noun 1. Minority. 2. a) A period of youth b) Immaturity.
peccant \PEH-kint\	adjective 1. Guilty of a moral offense: sinning. 2. Violating a principle or rule: faulty.
moxie \MAHK-see\	noun 1. Energy, pep. 2. Courage, determination. 3. Know-how, expertise.
rectitudinous \rek-tih-TOO-din-uss or rek-tih-TOOD-nuss\	"adjective 1. Characterized by straightness or moral integrity. 2. Piously self-righteous. [""Rectitudinous"" comes to us straight from the Late Latin ""rectitudin-"" (English added the ""-ous"" ending), which is, in turn, ultimately derived from the Latin word ""rectus,"" meaning both ""straight"" and ""right."" (There are other ""rectus"" descendants in English, including ""rectitude,"" of course, and ""rectilinear,"" ""rectangle,"" and ""rectify."") When ""rectitudinous"" first appeared in print in 1897, it was in the phrase ""notoriously and unctuously rectitudinous."" Although ""rectitude"" often expresses an admirable moral integrity, ""rectitudinous"" has always had a less flattering side. It can suggest not only moral uprightness but also a displeasing holier-than-thou attitude.]"
solicitous \suh-LIH-suh-tuhs or suh-LIHS-tuhs\	"adjective 1. Apprehensive. 2. Meticulously careful. 3. Full of desire: eager. [From Latin sollus (whole). Ultimately from the Indo-European root sol- (whole), which brought us solid, salute, save, salvo, soldier, catholicity, salutary, and salubrious. Earliest documented use: 1563.] ""The staff is solicitous of its core customer; efficient with others."" - Alexandra Jacobs; Dennis Basso's New Shop; The New York Times; Dec 12, 2013."
prehensile \pree-HEN-sul or pree-HEN-sile\	"adjective 1. Capable of seizing or grasping, especially by wrapping around. 2. Skilled at keen perception or mental grasp of an idea or concept. 3. Greedy. [From French prehensile, coined by French naturalist Georges Louis Leclerc De Buffon, from Latin prehensus.] ""The drugstore toothbrush rack has become a circus of ergonomic grips, flexing heads, and prehensile gum-probes -- an entire retail sector transformed by design."" - Philip Nobel; Can Design in America Avoid the Style Trap?; The New York Times; Nov 26, 2000."
quotidian \kwoh-TID-ee-un\	adjective 1. Occurring every day. 2. Commonplace, ordinary.
superannuated \soo-per-AN-yuh-wayt-id\	adjective 1. Retired because of age or infirmity. 2. Too old for use, work, service, or a position. 3. Antiquated or obsolete: superannuated ideas.
rectilinear \reck-tuh-LIN-ee-er\	adjective 1. Moving in or forming a straight line. 2. Characterized by straight lines.
riot act \RYE-ut-akt\	noun A vigorous reprimand or warning -- used in the phrase read the riot act
spumescent \spyoo-MEH-sunt\	adjective Frothy, foamy.
rebus \REE-bus\	noun A representation of syllables or words by means of pictures or symbols; also: a riddle made up of such pictures or symbols
solon \SOH-lun or SOH-lahn\	"noun 1. A wise and skillful lawgiver. 2. A member of a legislative body. [After Solon (c. 638-558 BCE), an Athenian lawmaker who introduced political, economic, and moral reforms and revised the harsh code of laws established by Draco. Earliest documented use: 1631.] ""After due consideration and debate, our solons last week offered new rules designed to prevent dangerous practices."" - Randall W. Forsyth; Riskless Business; Barron's (New York); Dec 16, 2013."
sophistry \SAH-fuh-stree\	noun 1. Subtly deceptive reasoning or argumentation. 2. An argument apparently correct in form but actually invalid; especially: such an argument used to deceive.
spunk \SPUHNK\	noun 1. A woody tinder. 2. Mettle, pluck. 3. Spirit, liveliness.
rodomontade \rah-duh-mun-TAYD or rah-duh-mun-TAHD\	"noun Pretentious boasting. adjective Bragging verb intr. To boast; brag. [From Middle French, from Italian Rodomonte, the boastful king in Orlando Innamorato by Matteo Boiardo and Orlando Furioso by Ludovico Ariosto.] ""It is difficult to believe that a reformed and tempered man would agree to a poster of himself with the following copy: `The sum of the amusement world from which all lesser luminaries borrow light. Born in the town of Bethel, Conn., July 5, 1810. Started as a showman in 1835. He has conceived and exhibited more gigantic amusements and enterprises than any other showman that ever lived. (He) is the wealthiest manager on the face of the Earth and projector and builder of a great city, (he) has been the frequent guest of emperors, kings and queens. Once mayor of Bridgeport, Conn., 4 times member of state legislature, an editor, an able writer and a popular lecturer in Europe and America.' Rodomontade and modesty aside, there is a serious Barnum worthy of our attention."" - Ricky Jay, America's Prince of Humbug P.T. Barnum, The Los Angeles Times, Sep 17, 1989."
sapient \SAY-pee-unt or SAP-ee-unt\	adjective Possessing or expressing great sagacity: wise.
"postlude \POHST-lood (""oo"" as in ""food"")\"	noun 1. A closing piece of music. 2. A closing phase (as of an epoch or a literary work).
precipitate \pri-SIP-i-teyt or -tit\ (adjective sense)	adjective 1. a) Falling, flowing, or rushing with steep descent b) Precipitous, steep. 2. Exhibiting violent or unwise speed.
supererogation \soo-per-eh-ruh-GAY-shun\	"noun The act of performing more than is required by duty, obligation, or need. [""Supererogation"" has long had a special meaning within the Roman Catholic church for acts that are morally good but not required for salvation by God. Church doctrine holds that such good works make up a reserve fund of merit that can be drawn on by prayer in favour of sinners. In recent decades, ""supererogation"" has taken on another sense in philosophy, for a much-debated topic that refers to the nature of duty and to what extent moral actions can be optional.] ""For the rest, the staging is an act of supererogation, a distraction from the grandeur of Gluck's opera."""
scumble \SKUM-bul\	"verb 1. a) To make (as color or a painting) less brilliant by covering with a thin coat of opaque or semiopaque color b) to apply (a color) in this manner. 2. To soften the lines or colors of (a drawing) by rubbing lightly. [The history of ""scumble"" is blurry, but the word is thought to be related to the verb ""scum,"" an obsolete form of ""skim"" (meaning ""to pass lightly over""). Scumbling, as first perfected by artists such as Titian, involves passing dry, opaque coats of oil paint over a tinted background to create subtle tones and shadows. But although the painting technique dates to the 16th century, use of the word ""scumble"" is only known to have begun in the late 18th century. The more generalized ""smudge"" or ""smear"" sense appeared even later, in the mid-1800s.] ""Edouardo Vuillard's 'Woman Lighting a Stove in a Studio' ... trades the common impasto of Impressionism for a lighter scumbled texture."" — From an art review by Evan Gillespie in the South Bend Tribune, August 2, 2012"
pilgarlic \pil-GAR-lik\	"noun 1. A bald-headed person. 2. A man looked upon with humorous contempt or mock pity. [Literally peeled garlic, from pill (to peel) + garlic. Earliest documented use: 1529.] ""With his cherubic face, big blue eyes, pilgarlic pate, steel-rimmed glasses, and shuffling gait, Horace Greeley looked more like a character out of a Dickens novel than a presidential hopeful."" - Paul F. Boller Jr.; Presidential Campaigns; Oxford University Press; 2004."
shaggy-dog story \SHAG-ee-DOG-STOR-ee\	"noun A long, drawn-out circumstantial story concerning an inconsequential happening that impresses the teller as humorous but the hearer as boring and pointless; also: a similar humorous story whose humor lies in the pointlessness or irrelevance of the punch line. [The origin of the adjective ""shaggy-dog"" isn't truly known, but lexicographer Eric Partridge rather believably tells us that it originated with a shaggy-dog story of the amusing sort that involves -- of course! -- a shaggy dog. Today, the word sometimes refers to a rambling story that impresses the teller as humorous or interesting but the hearer as boring and pointless, but it can also refer to a similar story (or movie or TV show) that is actually humorous and whose humor lies in its very pointlessness or irrelevance.] ""The actor's next film is a shaggy-dog comedy in which he plays a burnt-out, unemployed slacker who falls for the girl next door."""
sui generis \soo-eye-JEN-uh-rus or soo-ee-JEN-uh-rus\	"adjective Of its own kind; unique. [From Latin sui (of its own) + generis (kind).] ""Time: What's the best piece of advice that you've gotten from someone about being President?"""
sophomoric \sahf-MOR-ik\	adjective 1. Conceited and overconfident of knowledge but poorly informed and immature. 2. Like a sophomore.
sternutation \ster-nyuh-TAY-shun\	"noun The act, fact, or noise of sneezing. [From Latin sternuere (to sneeze).] ""And all three forget their sectional differences in a delightful concert of sternutation. No business is too grave; no speaker too elegant to be sneezed at."" - Marjorie Hunter; The Days of Snuff and Such; The New York Times; Dec 4, 1985."
voracity \vor-RASS-uh-tee or vuh-RASS-uh-tee\	noun The quality or state of being ravenous or insatiable.
torpor \TOR-per\	noun 1. Mental or spiritual apathy. 2. A state of mental and motor inactivity with partial or total insensibility.
turpitude \TUR-puh-tood or TUR-puh-tyood\	noun Inherent baseness: depravity; also: a base act.
xanthic \ZAN-thik\	adjective Of, relating to, or tending toward a yellow color.
treacle \TREE-kuhl\	noun 1. A medicinal compound formerly in wide use as a remedy against poison. 2. chiefly British a) Molasses b) A blend of molasses, invert sugar, and corn syrup used as syrup at the table. 3. Something (as a tone of voice) heavily sweet and cloying.
vulpine \VUL-pyne\	adjective 1. Of, relating to, or resembling a fox. 2. Foxy, crafty.
trammel \TRAM-ul\	"noun 1. Something that limits or hinders. 2. A fishing net having three layers. 3. An instrument for drawing ellipses. 4. A shackle used in training a horse to amble. 5. An instrument for gauging and aligning parts of a machine. 6. A hook for hanging a pot or a kettle over a fire. verb To restrain; to hinder. [From Old French tramail, from Latin tremaculum, from tres (three) + macula (mesh). Ultimately from the Indo-European root trei- (three) that's also the source of such words as three, testify (to be the third person: to bear witness), and triskaidekaphobia (fear of the number 13).] ""'Lost in Showbiz asks what constitutes a crisis?' Jonathan Blake continues, free of the trammels of punctuation."""
swivet \SWIV-it\	"noun A state of extreme agitation. A state of nervous excitement, haste, or anxiety; flutter. [People have been in a swivet over one thing or another since the 1890s. That, at least, is when the word first appeared in print in a collection of ""Peculiar Words and Usages"" of Kentucky published by the American Dialect Society. In the ensuing years, ""swivet"" popped up in other pockets of the South as well. Chances are it had already been around for some time before it was recorded in writing, and by the time it was, nobody could say where or how it had originated. What we do know is that its use gradually spread, so that by the 1950s it was regularly appearing in national magazines like Time and The New Yorker. Thus, it entered the mainstream of American English.] ""The world's in a swivet over airport security. The deployment of full-body scanning technology in about 15 percent of United States airports has people even more anxious and cranky than usual as we head into the holiday season."""
veld \VELT or FELT\	"noun Open grassland in southern Africa. [From Afrikaans veld, from Dutch veld (field).] ""From elephant turds, it (a dung beetle) molds food balls, which it rolls backward across the veld by standing on its head and kicking manically with its heels."" - Rob Nixon; Around the Water Hole; The New York Times; Jul 28, 2002. ""The fiercely waged struggle which went on between humans and felines in those far-off days when sabre-toothed tiger and cave lion contended with primeval man, has long ago been decided in favour of the most fitly equipped combatant -- the Thing with a Thumb -- and the descendants of the dispossessed family are relegated to-day, for the most part, to the waste lands of jungle and veld, where an existence of self-effacement is the only alternative to extermination."" - Hector Hugh Munro (Saki); The Achievement of the Cat."
weltschmerz \VELT-shmairts\	"noun World weariness; pessimism, apathy, or sadness felt at the difference between physical reality and the ideal state. [From German Weltschmerz, from Welt (world) + Schmerz (pain).] ""I hate being told to have a good time! I'll feel the weltschmerz if I want to."" - Mari Sasano; Things to Do Today; Edmonton Journal (Canada); Dec 3, 2005."
waggish \WAG-ish\	"adjective 1. Displaying good-humored mischief. 2. Humorous. [One who is waggish acts like a wag. What, then, is a wag? Etymologists think ""wag"" probably came from ""waghalter,"" a word that was once used for a ""gallows bird"" (that is, a person who was going to be, or deserved to be, hanged). ""Waghalter"" was apparently shortened to ""wag"" and used jokingly or affectionately for mischievous pranksters or youths. Hence a wag is a joker, and waggery is merriment or practical joking. ""Waggish"" can describe the prank itself as well as the prankster type; the class clown might be said to have a ""waggish disposition"" or might be said to be prone to ""waggish antics.""]"
toothsome \TOOTH-sum\	"adjective 1. Delicious. 2. Agreeable; pleasant. 3. Sexually attractive. [One meaning of ""tooth"" is ""a fondness or taste for something specified."" ""Toothsome"" comes from this definition of ""tooth"" plus the suffix ""-some,"" meaning ""characterized by."" Although ""toothsome"" was at first used to describe general attractiveness, it quickly developed a second sense that was specific to the sense of taste (perhaps because from as far back as Chaucer's time, ""tooth"" could also refer specifically to eating and the sense of taste). In addition, ""toothsome"" is now showing signs of acquiring a third sense, ""toothy"" (as in ""a toothsome grin""), but this sense is not yet established enough to qualify for dictionary entry.] ""You recognize Heichinro, Chinatown's oldest restaurant, serving toothsome Cantonese cuisine since 1887 and credited with creating sanma men, noodles in a thick sauce topped with sauted vegetables."" - Burritt Sabin; New Subway Signals Start of a New Era; The Japan Times (Tokyo); Feb 13, 2004. ""On the one hand the band - based around the songwriting partnership of toothsome 23-year-old singer Jill Jackson and 26-year-old drummer Jim Duguid - look and sound a lot like a rock band."" - Rock Genie's Bottle of Pop; Scotland on Sunday (Edinburgh); Feb 29, 2004."
yawp \YAWP\	verb 1. To make a raucous noise: squawk. 2. Clamor, complain.
taphephobia \taf-ee-FOH-bee-uh\	noun Fear of being buried alive.
tchotchke \CHAHCH-kuh\	noun Knickknack, trinket.
thaumaturgy \THAW-muh-tur-jee\	"noun The performance of miracles; specifically: magic [The magic of ""thaumaturgy"" is miraculous. The word, from a Greek word meaning ""miracle working,"" is applicable to any performance of miracles, especially by incantation. It can also be used of things that merely seem miraculous and unexplainable, like the thaumaturgy of a motion picture's illusions (aka ""movie magic""), or the thaumaturgy at work in an athletic team's ""miracle"" comeback. In addition to ""thaumaturgy,"" we also have ""thaumaturge"" and ""thaumaturgist,"" both of which mean ""a performer of miracles"" or ""a magician,"" and the adjective ""thaumaturgic,"" meaning ""performing miracles"" or ""of, relating to, or dependent on thaumaturgy.""]"
transpontine \transs-PAHN-tyne\	"adjective 1. Across the bridge. 2. Situated on the south side of the Thames River in London. 3. Melodramatic (alluding to the type of dramas once performed in theaters south of the Thames). [From Latin trans- (across) + pons (bridge). Ultimately from the Indo-European root pent- (to tread) that also gave us words such as English find, Dutch pad (path), French pont (bridge), and Russian sputnik (traveling companion).] ""Baker was short and chunky and transpontine -- he lived over the bridge in Barnes with his mum and cacti."" - Johnny Green and Garry Barker; A Riot of Our Own: Night and Day with the Clash; Faber & Faber; 1999. ""The singer who makes the biggest splash is Lauren Flanigan, prone to transpontine acting at critical moments."" - Michael Tanner; Solemnity of Weber; The Spectator (London, UK); Jul 6, 2002."
vespertine \VESS-per-tyne\	adjective 1. Of, relating to, or occurring in the evening. 2. Active, flowering, or flourishing in the evening; crepuscular.
tocsin \tahk-sun\	"noun An alarm bell or a warning signal. [From Middle French toquassen, from Provençal tocasenh, from tocar (to touch) + senh (bell).] ""In an unprecedented collaboration to sound the tocsin, Nature and Foreign Affairs have recently devoted special issues to the 'plausible scenario' of a pandemic that kills millions and wrecks the global economy."" - Mike Davis; Avian Flu: A State of Unreadiness; The Nation (New York); Jul 18, 2005."
vulnerary \VUHL-nuh-rehr-ee\	adjective Used for or useful in healing wounds.
wheedle \HWEE-dull or WEE-dull\	verb To obtain or influence by flattery or coaxing.
surly \SUR-lee\	adjective 1. Irritably sullen and churlish in mood or manner: crabbed. 2. Menacing or threatening in appearance.
thrasonical \thray-SAH-nih-kul or thruh-SAH-nih-kul\	"adjective Bragging or boastful. [After Thraso, a braggart soldier in the comedy Eunuchus (161 BCE) by the Roman playwright Terence. The name is derived from the Greek word thrasos (bold). Earliest documented example of the word used allusively: 1564.] ""But I decided to give further thought to this friend's thrasonical effusion."" - Ground Zero Ekitiland; The Nation (Lagos, Nigeria); Apr 15, 2009."
temporize \TEM-puh-rize\	"verb 1. To act to suit the situation; yield to dominant opinion; compromise. 2. To gain time by discussing or negotiating at length. [From French temporiser (to bide one's time), from Medieval Latin temporizare (to pass the time), from Latin tempor-, from tempus (time).] ""Over the past several months, as the international community has continued to temporize, conditions in Sudan have worsened."" - Editorial: Darfur, Continued; The Providence Journal (Rhode Island); Apr 19, 2005. ""They've a temper, some of them--particularly verbs, they're the proudest -- adjectives you can do anything with, but not verbs -- however, I can manage the whole lot of them!"" boasts Humpty-Dumpty in Lewis Carroll's 1872 classic, ""Through the Looking Glass""."
kibitzer \KIH-bit-ser\	noun One who looks on and often offers unwanted advice or comment especially at a card game; broadly: One who offers opinions
"autochthonous \aw-TAHK-thuh-nuss (""th"" as in ""think"")"	"adjective 1. Indigenous, native. 2. Originating in the place where found. [Ancient Athenians considered their ancestors the primordial inhabitants of their land, as if sprung from the very soil of the region they inhabited. Their word for any true-born Athenian, ""autochthon,"" itself springs from ""auto-,"" meaning ""self,"" and ""chthon,"" meaning ""earth."" Nowadays, the English adjective ""autochthonous"" is often used in somewhat meaty scientific or anthropological writing (as in ""several autochthonous cases of fever broke out in the region""), but it was a ""bready"" context in which it made its debut. Observed English literary critic William Taylor in 1805: ""The English have this great predilection for autochthonous bread and butter"" (rather than French bread, one might safely presume).] ""As if this were a holy place, a shrine where the autochthonous tribes had gathered to worship."" - T.C. Boyle; The Women; Viking; 2009. Antonym: allochthonous (Originating in a region other than where it is found.)"
nosegay \NOHZ-gay\	"noun A small bunch of flowers: posy. [Posy is a variant of the word poesy, meaning ""poem, poetry."" Sometimes called nosegays or tussie-mussies, posies were popular accessories among fashionable women in Victorian England, and, harkening the word's literary origin, became vehicles for the floral ""language of love.""] HAMLET: Is this a prologue, or the posy of a ring? OPHELIA: ’Tis brief, my lord. HAMLET: As woman’s love. -- William Shakespeare, Hamlet, 1603 This time I have to bring her in an hour a posy of the rarest flowers, and where am I to find them? - Andrew Lang, The Orange Fairy Book, 1906"
sacerdotal \sass-er-DOH-tul or sak-er-DOH-tul\	"adjective 1. Priestly. 2. A religious belief that priests are essential mediators between God and mankind. [Via French from Latin sacerdotalis (priestly), from sacerdos (priest, literally one who offers sacrifices), from sacer (holy, sacred) + dare (to give).] ""My student came from a country where professors hold a sacerdotal status and so took my jest as a brushoff."" - David D Perlmutter; Are You A Good Protege?; Chronicle of Higher Education (Washington, DC); Apr 18, 2008."
inspissate \in-SPIH-sayt or IN-spuh-sayt\	"verb To thicken or condense. [From Latin inspissare (to thicken), from spissus (thick). Earliest documented use: 1603.] ""These are flavors that have been inspissating in some timeless tandoor for hours, days -- decades."" - Brad Leithauser; And an Outpost on Rodeo Drive; The New York Times; Mar 5, 1995."
feckless \FEK-luss\	adjective 1. Weak, ineffective. 2. Worthless, irresponsible.
yule \YOOL\	noun The feast of the nativity of Jesus Christ: Christmas.
smarmy \SMAHR-mee\	"adjective 1. Hypocritically, complacently, or effusively earnest; unctuous. 2. Sleek. [From smarm, to smear.] ""But `weasel' lives on as a synonym for that subspecies of Hollywood gentry, the entertainment industry executive, conjuring up a whole host of smarmy tassel-shoe traits."" - Richard Conniff, You can call him `cute' or you can call him `hungry', Smithsonian, Feb 1997."
omnium-gatherum \ahm-nee-um-GA-thuh-rum\	noun A miscellaneous collection (as of things or persons).
mordacious \mor-DAY-shuss\	adjective 1. Biting or given to biting. 2. Biting or sharp in manner or style: caustic.
catercorner \KAT-ee-kor-ner or KAT-uh-kor-ner\	adverb or adjective In a diagonal or oblique position: on a diagonal or oblique line
bon vivant \bahn-vee-VAHNT or bohn-vee-VAHN\	"noun One who enjoys good things in life, especially good food and drink. [From French, from bon (good) + vivant (a person living), from vivre (to live). Earliest documented use: 1695.] ""The consumption culture has gone a long way in establishing Singapore as a watering hole of choice for the Asian bon vivant."" - Uptown Pours; The Business Times (Singapore); Mar 18, 2011."
contemn \kun-TEM\	"verb To treat with contempt; to despise. [From Middle English contempnen, from Latin contemnere, from com- + temnere (to despise).] ""Sarah's personality, after all, is almost singularly defined by her caring, symbiotic relationship with Leon and several other friends; in departing so abruptly, she seems to contemn this central dimension of her identity."" - Alex Raksin; The Dreams of Zoo Animals by Valmai Howe; The Los Angeles Times; May 7, 1989. ""Matthew Rees explains the ins and outs of the failed coup that has left Newt Gingrich contemning Dick Armey, Tom DeLay, and John Boehner, his GOP subalterns."" - Scot Lehigh; Sermon on Sex; The Boston Globe; Jul 30, 1997."
Cockaigne \kah-KAYN\	"noun An imaginary land of great luxury and ease. [The term ""Cockaigne"" comes from the Middle French phrase ""pais de cocaigne,"" which literally means ""the land of plenty."" The word was first popularized in a 13th-century French poem that is known in English as ""The Land of Cockaigne."" According to an early English translation of the work, in Cockaigne ""the houses were made of barley sugar cakes, the streets were paved with pastry, and the shops supplied goods for nothing."" (It's this original Cockaigne that is referenced in our second example above.) Some have theorized that ""cocaigne"" derives from an earlier word related to ""cake"" or ""cook,"" but its early history remains obscure.] ""Located on a secluded white sandy beach, the resort -- with its many amenities, including a first-class luxury spa -- is like a utopian Cockaigne."""
quondam \KWAHN-dum or KWAHN-dam\	"adjective Former; onetime. [From Latin quondam (formerly). Earliest documented use: 1535.] ""One of the assumptions Madison and others labored under was that Britain would be too preoccupied with beating Napoleon to pay much attention to its quondam colonies."" - Joyce Appleby; The Washington Post; A Stumbling, Fiery End to War of 1812; May 5, 2013."
rectitude \REK-tuh-tood\	noun 1. The quality or state of being straight. 2. Moral integrity: righteousness. 3. The quality or state of being correct in judgment or procedure.
longanimity \long-guh-NIH-muh-tee\	"noun Calmness in the face of suffering and adversity; Forbearance. [Middle English longanimite, from Old French, from Late Latin longanimitas, from longanimis, patient : Latin longus, long + Latin animus, mind, reason.] ""In line with the integrity of a true warrior, he faced the imposition of this terrible condition with dignity and longanimity ...."" - Obituaries / Paid Death Notices, Newsday, 2 Apr 1999."
indefeasible \in-dih-FEE-zuh-bul\	adjective Not capable of being annulled or voided or undone.
peripeteia \peh-ruh-puh-TEE-uh or peh-ruh-puh-TYE-uh\	noun A sudden or unexpected change of fortune, especially in a literary work. A classic example is Oedipus learning about his parentage. [From Greek peripiptein (to change suddenly), from peri- (near, around) + piptein (to fall). Ultimately from the Indo-European root pet- (to rush or fly), which also gave us feather, petition, compete, perpetual, pterodactyl, helicopter, pterodactyl, propitious, pinnate, pteridology (study of ferns), lepidopterology (study of butterflies and moths), pencel (flag at the end of a lance), and impetuous. Earliest documented use: 1591.] “Dr. Farhad feels the glaring eyes of one of the machine-gun-toting officers on him and smiles bitterly at his fate. ... This selfless doctor, even at this daunting moment of peripeteia, is worried about the critical condition of one of his poor patients whom he is scheduled to operate on tomorrow. “ - Shahriar Mandanipour, translated by Sara Khalili; Censoring an Iranian Love Story; Knopf; 2009.
edulcorate \ih-DUL-kuh-rayt\	verb To free from harshness (as of attitude): soften.
obloquy \OB-luh-kwee\	"noun: 1. Censure or abusive language towards someone, especially when expressed by many. 2. Disgrace resulting from public condemnation. [From Latin obloquium (talking against, contradiction), from ob- (against) + loqui (to speak). Ultimately from the Indo-European root tolkw (to speak) that is also the source of somniloquy, loquacious, and allocution.] ""[Jimmy Carter] is a man who is prepared to risk the obloquy and criticism of die-hard neocons and nervous fellow senior Democrats to break the chains of Washington's foolish Middle East peace policy."" Carter Mission; Arab News (Jeddah, Saudi Arabia); Apr 9, 2008."
desideratum \dih-sid-uh-RAY-tum; -RAH-\	"noun [plural: desiderata] Something desired or considered necessary. [From Latin desideratum (something desired), from desiderare (to desire).] ""The researchers also asked what qualities the two groups [well-off vs street children] of young people would like to see in an 'ideal' Russian president. Twenty-nine percent of both groups said that the ideal president should be kind and tough, with the children of the street slightly more inclined than their better-off counterparts to stress kindness as a desideratum."" - Paul Goble; Wealthier Moscow Teenagers More Inclined to View U.S. as Russia's Enemy; The Moscow Times (Russia); Jun 21, 2009."
uxorial \uk-SOR-ee-ul or ug-ZOR-ee-ul\	adjective Of or pertaining to a wife; typical of or befitting a wife.
groundling \GROUND-ling\	noun 1. a) A spectator who stood in the pit of an Elizabethan theater. b) A person of unsophisticated taste. 2. One that lives or works on or near the ground.
unctuous \UNGK-choo-us\	adjective 1. Of the texture of an unguent or ointment; oily. 2. Having a greasy feel. 3. Marked by a false or smug earnestness or agreeableness.
impudicity \im-pyoo-DIH-suh-tee\	noun Lack of modesty.
indagate \IN-duh-gayt\	verb To investigate.
Panglossian \pan-GLOSS-ee-un\	"adjective Excessively optimistic. [Dr. Pangloss was the pedantic old tutor in Voltaire's satirical novel Candide. Pangloss was an incurable, albeit misguided, optimist who claimed that ""all is for the best in this best of all possible worlds."" So persistent was he in his optimism that he kept it even after witnessing and experiencing great cruelty and suffering. The name ""Pangloss"" comes from Greek ""pan,"" meaning ""all,"" and ""glossa,"" meaning ""tongue,"" suggesting glibness and talkativeness.]"
desuetude \DES-wih-tood, -tyood\	"noun A state of disuse. [From Latin de- (away from) + suescere (to become accustomed). Earliest documented use: 1623.] ""Far from being a high-tech wonder, the Earth Station had a sad, neglected air about it, a feeling of desuetude and abandonment."" - Douglas Preston; Impact; Forge Books; 2010."
nescience \NESH-uhn(t)s; NESH-ee-uhn(t)s\	noun Ignorance. [From Latin ne- (not) + scire (to know). Ultimately from the Indo-European root skei- (to cut or split) that has also given us schism, ski, shin, science, conscience, nice, scienter, adscititious, and sciolist.]
kakistocracy \kak-uh-STAH-kruh-see\	noun Government by the worst.
puissant \PWIH-sunt or PYOO-uh-sunt\	"adjective Potent. [Via French from Latin posse (to be able), ultimately from the Indo-European root poti- (powerful, lord) that is also the source of power, potent, possess, possible, posse, Italian podesta, and Turkish pasha (via Persian).] ""The full-race Evo is about 557 pounds lighter and 30 horsepower more puissant."" - Dan Neil; A Beast in the 'burbs; Los Angeles Times; Jun 16, 2004."
divagate \DYE-vuh-gayt or DIH-vuh-gayt\	"verb To wander or digress. [From Latin divagatus, past participle of divagari (to wander off), from dis- (away) + vagari (to wander). Earliest documented use: 1599.] ""Unfortunately, John Armstrong leaves the 'big point' dangling and undeveloped while he divagates about economic efficiency."" - Felipe Fernández-Armesto; In Search of Civilization (book review); The Times (London, UK); Jun 18, 2009."
degringolade \day-gran-guh-LAHD\	"noun A rapid decline, deterioration, or collapse (of a situation). [From French, from dégringoler (to tumble down, fall sharply), from Middle French desgringueler, from des- (de-) + gringueler (to tumble), from Middle Dutch crinkelen (to curl).] ""Even before the latest degringolade, Mr Duncan Smith's position had been disintegrating."" - Bruce Anderson; This is Duncan Smith's Last Stand; The Independent (London, UK); Feb 24, 2003."
namby-pamby \nam-bee-PAM-bee\	adjective 1. Lacking in character or substance: insipid. 2. Weak, indecisive.
truckle \TRUH-kul\	"verb To submit or yield obsequiously or tamely (usually followed by ""to"") Don't truckle to unreasonable demands."
adjuvant \AJ-uh-vunt\	adjective 1. Serving to aid or contribute: auxiliary. 2. Assisting in the prevention, amelioration, or cure of disease.
frisson \free-SOHN\	"noun A sudden, brief moment of excitement or fear; thrill, shudder. [From French frisson (shiver), from Old French friçon, from Late Latin friction-, from Latin frictio (friction), from Latin frigere (to be cold).] ""I get to find small but interesting differences related to communication in Japan and the United States that still give me a pleasurable frisson of surprise."" - Kate Elwood; Surprising Differences; The Daily Yomiuri (Tokyo, Japan); Jan 24, 2005."
malediction \mal-uh-DIK-shun\	noun A curse or execration. [Middle English maladicte, from Latin maledictus, past participle of maledicere, to curse : male, ill + dicere, to speak.]
farrago \fuh-RAH-go; fuh-RAY-go\	"noun [plural: farragoes] A confused mixture; an assortment; a medley. [""Farrago"" might seem an unlikely relative of ""farina"" (the mealy breakfast cereal), but the two terms have their roots in the same Latin noun. Both derive from ""far,"" the Latin name for ""spelt"" (a type of grain). In Latin, ""farrago"" meant ""mixed fodder"" — cattle feed, that is — or it was used more generally to mean ""mixture."" When it was adopted into English in the early 1600s, ""farrago"" retained the ""mixture"" sense of its ancestor. Today, we often use it for a jumble or medley of disorganized, haphazard, or even nonsensical ideas or elements.]"
logorrhea \law-guh-REE-uh\	"noun Excessive flow of words, especially when incoherent. [From Greek logo- (word) + -rrhea (flow), from rhoia (flow). Also see rhinorrhea. Earliest documented use: 1902.] ""Dumas suffers from logorrhea, induced by the simple formula that the more he wrote, the more money he made."" - Erik Spanberg; The Count of Monte Cristo; The Christian Science Monitor (Boston, Massachusetts); Feb 6, 2011."
mellifluous \muh-LIF-loo-us\	"adjective Flowing as with honey; flowing sweetly or smoothly; as, a mellifluous voice. [From Middle English, from Late Latin mellifluus, from melli-, from Latin mel (honey) + fluere (to flow). Some other words that come from the same root are marmalade, molasses, and the unlikely mildew! One word that has somewhat similar sense and sound but different root is melodious (from melos: song).] ""The lambada, a mellifluous, nearly licentious dance from the north-east part of Brazil, piqued the world's interest (and briefly Hollywood's) early in this decade."" - What makes Brazil Brazilian? (Brazilians' Passion for Dancing); The Economist (London, UK); Mar 30, 1996. ""Lincoln Center provided a symbolic glossary: the good guys wear green and white, the villains red. Heroes sing mellifluous chant; villains speak; women are played by heavily veiled men."" - Edward Rothstein; A Gap Between Cultures Crying Out for a Bridge; The New York Times; Jul 20, 2002."
videlicet \vi-DEL-uh-sit or vih-DAY-lih-ket\	adverb That is to say: namely. Commonly abbreviated viz.
forlorn \fur-LORN; for-\	adjective 1. Sad and lonely because deserted, abandoned, or lost. 2. Bereft; forsaken. 3. Pitiful condition or appearance. 4. Desperate.
ineluctable \in-ih-LUCK-tuh-buhl\	"adjective Inevitable. [Like drama, wrestling was popular in ancient Greece and Rome. ""Wrestler,"" in Latin, is ""luctator,"" and ""to wrestle"" is ""luctari."" ""Luctari"" also has extended senses -- ""to struggle,"" ""to strive,"" or ""to contend."" ""Eluctari"" joined ""e-"" (""ex-"") with ""luctari,"" forming a verb meaning ""to struggle clear of."" ""Ineluctabilis"" brought in the negative prefix ""in-"" to form an adjective describing something that cannot be escaped or avoided. English speakers borrowed the word as ""ineluctable"" around 1623. Another word that has its roots in ""luctari"" is ""reluctant."" ""Reluctari"" means ""to struggle against"" -- and someone who is ""reluctant"" resists or holds back.] ""These qualms were squashed out of existence by the ineluctable pressure of necessity."" - Kate Christensen; In the Drink; Doubleday; 1999."
traduce \truh-DOOS; -DYOOS\	transitive verb To [falsely] represent as blamable; to vilify.
evanescent \ev-uh-NES-unt\	adjective Liable to vanish or pass away like vapor; fleeting.
contravene \kon-truh-VEEN\	transitive verb 1. To act or be counter to; to violate. 2. To oppose in argument; to contradict.
furbelow \FUR-buh-low\	noun 1. A pleated or gathered flounce on a woman's garment; a ruffle. 2. Something showy or superfluous; a bit of showy ornamentation.
celerity \suh-LAIR-uh-tee\	noun Rapidity of motion or action; quickness; swiftness.
voluble \VOL-yuh-buhl\	adjective 1. Characterized by a ready flow of speech. 2. Easily rolling or turning; rotating.
susurration \soo-suh-RAY-shun\	"noun A whispering sound; a soft murmur. [Susurrus comes from the Latin susurrus, ""a murmuring, a whispering, a humming.""]"
gelid \JEL-id\	adjective Extremely cold; icy.
volte-face \vawlt-FAHSS\	"noun An about-face; a reversal, as in policy or opinion. [""Volte-face"" came to English by way of French from Italian ""voltafaccia"" (from ""voltare,"" Italian for ""to turn,"" and ""faccia,"" meaning ""face""). It has existed as an English noun since at least 1819, making it just slightly older than the more English-sounding ""about-face."" Although foot soldiers have been stepping smartly to the command ""About face! Forward march!"" for centuries, ""about-face"" didn't appear as a figurative noun meaning ""a reversal of attitude, behavior, or point of view"" until 1853.] ""The mayor's abrupt volte-face on new town zoning regulations made some of his critics wonder if he was being persuaded by special interest groups."""
extempore \ik-STEM-puh-ree\	adverb: Impulsively; on the spur of the moment. adjective: Done or performed extempore.
sinecure \SY-nih-kyur; SIN-ih-\	"noun A position in which one is paid for little or no work. [""Sinecure"" comes from the Medieval Latin phrase ""sine cura,"" which literally means ""without cure."" Not surprisingly, the earliest known use of ""sinecure"" referred to an ecclesiastical benefice without cure of souls — that is, a clerical office in which the job-holder did not have to tend to the spiritual care and instruction of church members. Such sinecures were virtually done away with by the end of the 19th century, but by then the word had acquired a broader sense referring to any paid position with few or no responsibilities. From Latin beneficium sine cura (a church position not involving caring for the souls of the parishioners), from sine (without) + cura (care). Earliest documented use: 1662.] “Some 200,000 civil servants have been enlisted. Half are fairly useless: former guerrillas given sinecures to keep the peace. This cannot last. Some 75% of the budget is spent on wages.” - A New Country Rises from the Ruins; South Sudan; The Economist (London, UK); May 4, 2013."
prolix \pro-LIKS; PRO-liks\	"adjective Tediously wordy. [From Latin prolixus (extended, poured), from liquere (to flow), which is also the source of words such as liquid, liquor, licorice. Now you see the connection -- why consuming liquor makes people prolix.] ""No one has ever called him prolix. At a future-war seminar that he sponsored, Mr. Andrew Marshall mumbled a few introductory words and then sat in silence, eyebrows arched, arms folded, for the remaining two days."" - James Der Derian; The Illusion of a Grand Strategy; The New York Times; May 25, 2001."
perforce \pur-FORS\	adverb By necessity; by force of circumstance.
tyro \TY-roh\	noun A beginner in learning; a novice.
philomath \FIL-uh-math\	"noun A lover of learning. [From Greek philomaths (fond of learning), from philo- (loving) + math- root of manthanein (to learn).] ""Why was the library given this name? ... Tomasz Zan simply appealed to them as patron by virtue of having been a philomath and an exile who remained faithful to his country."" - Czeslaw Milosz, From Milosz's ABC's, Partisan Review (Boston), Winter 2001."
temerarious \tem-uh-RAIR-ee-us\	adjective Recklessly or presumptuously daring; rash.
roister \ROY-stur\	intransitive verb 1. To engage in boisterous merrymaking; to revel; to carouse. 2. To bluster; to swagger.
seriatim \sir-ee-AY-tim; -AT-im\	adverb In a series; one after another.
mien \MEEN\	"noun Appearance, bearing, or demeanor. [Probably a shortened form of demean (to conduct oneself in a specified manner), influenced by French mine (appearance). Earliest documented use: 1522.] ""Everyone Nanako Coates greets walks away smiling. But beyond that exuberant, youthful mien is a seasoned veteran with years of professional experience in the restaurant business."" - Eizo Kobayashi; Daughter Follows in Family's Culinary Tradition; Oakland Tribune (California); Sep 17, 2013."
detritus \dih-TRY-tuhs\	noun; plural detritus: 1. Loose material that is worn away from rocks. 2. Debris.
myrmidon \MUR-muh-don; -dun\	"noun A loyal follower; especially: a subordinate who executes orders unquestioningly or unscrupulously [The Myrmidons, legendary inhabitants of Thessaly in Greece, were known for their fierce devotion to their king, Achilles, who led them in the Trojan War. ""Myrmex"" means ""ant"" in Greek, an image that evokes small and insignificant workers mindlessly fulfilling their duty. Whether the original Myrmidons were given their name for that reason is open to question. The ""ant"" association is strong, however. Some say the name is from a legendary ancestor who once had the form of an ant; others say the Myrmidons were actually transformed from ants. In any case, since the 1400s, we've employed ""myrmidon"" in its not-always-complimentary, ant-evoking, figurative sense.]"
pusillanimous \pyoo-suh-LAN-uh-muhs\	"adjective Lacking courage; timid. [From Latin pusillus (weak, very small), diminutive of pullus (young of an animal) + animus (spirit, mind).] ""Although the admonitory title and scarlet cover of Erik Durschmied's Beware the Dragon is designed to chill the blood of pusillanimous Europeans and Americans already anxious about the rise of China, the book itself is a war correspondent's take on the past, not the future."" - Victor Mallet; The Rebalance of Power; The Financial Times (London, UK); Apr 5 2008."
philter \FIL-tur\	noun 1. A love potion or charm. 2. A potion or charm believed to have magic power.
flummery \FLUM-uh-ree\	noun: 1. A name given to various sweet dishes made with milk, eggs, flour, etc. 2. Empty compliment; unsubstantial talk or writing; mumbo jumbo; nonsense.
enjoin \en-JOIN\	"transitive verb 1. To order or prescribe a course of action. 2. To forbid or restrain. [From Old French enjoindre, from Latin injungere (to join), from in- (towards) + jungere (to join). Ultimately from the Indo-European root yeug- (to join), which is also the ancestor of junction, yoke, yoga, adjust, juxtapose, junta, syzygy, jugular, and rejoinder. Earliest documented use: around 1225.] ""Ajanlekoko enjoined the members of the Building Collapse Prevention Guild (BCPG) to continue the struggle."" - Okwy Iroegbu-Chikezie; Group Advises Govt on Building Failures; The Nation (Lagos, Nigeria); May 22, 2012. ""It asks a court to declare the ordinance invalid and enjoin the city from enforcing it."" - Bruce Vielmetti; Hispanic Group Sues Over Milwaukee Contracting Rule; The Journal Sentinel (Milwaukee, Wisconsin); May 1, 2012."
bibulous \BIB-yuh-luhs\	adjective 1. Related to drinking alcohol. 2. Readily absorbing fluids or moisture.
affray \uh-FRAY\	noun A tumultuous assault or quarrel; a brawl.
excrescence \ik-SKRESS-uhn(t)s\	noun 1. Something (especially something abnormal) growing out from something else. 2. A disfiguring or unwanted mark, part, or addition.
soi-disant \swah-dee-ZAHN\	adjective Self-styled; so-called. [From French soi-disant (self-styled, so-called) from soi (oneself) + disant (saying). Earliest documented use: 1752.] “For some reason, the soi-disant ‘entertainment capital of the world’ has never been able to sustain a resident [ballet] company.” - Patt Diroll; A Step Ahead for Ballet; Pasadena Star-News (California); May 25, 2009. “Hannah turns to the suspiciously handsome soi-disant geek.” - Virginia Heffernan; Really, Mom, We’re Just Going Out for Ice Cream; The New York Times; Feb 16, 2004.
refractory \rih-FRAK-tuh-ree\	"adjective 1. Hard to manage; stubborn. 2. Resistant to usual methods or treatment. 3. Difficult to fuse: resistant to high temperature. noun A heat-resistant material. [From alteration of refractary, from Latin refractarius (stubborn), from refractus, past participle of refringere (to break up), from re- + frangere (to break).] ""There is nothing so awful - whether a week's-worth of rain, a marital quarrel, a refractory child - that it cannot be resolved in the kitchen."" - Keith Botsford; Season of Soups and Mellow Vegetableness; The Independent (London, UK); Nov 6, 1993. ""Though the Nobel laureate (William Faulkner) could often be indulgent with children, he was essentially a withdrawn and refractory man."" - Michael Dirda; Mississippi in the Summer!; The Washington Post; Aug 11, 2002."
paean \PEE-uhn\	"noun 1. A joyous song of praise, triumph, or thanksgiving. 2. An expression of praise or joy. [According to the poet Homer, the Greek god Apollo sometimes took the guise of Paean, physician to the gods. The earliest musical paeans were hymns of thanksgiving and praise that were dedicated to Apollo. They were sung at events ranging from boisterous festivals to public funerals, and were the traditional marching songs of armies heading into battle. Over time, the word became generalized, and it is now used for any kind of tribute.] ""Hitch-22 is among the loveliest paeans to the dearness of one's friends."" - Dwight Garner; In Memoir, Christopher Hitchens Looks Back; The New York Times; Jun 1, 2010."
tintinnabulation \tin-tih-nab-yuh-LAY-shuhn\	noun A tinkling sound, as of a bell or bells.
repletion \rih-PLEE-shun\	"noun The condition of being completely filled or satisfied. [Via French, from Latin replere, from re- (back, again) + plere (to fill), from plenus (full). Earliest documented use: 1398.] ""Her body tingled with repletion and yet she was somehow unsatisfied."" - Susan Swann; The Ritual of Pearls; Little, Brown; 1995."
gambol \GAM-buhl\	"intransitive verb To dance and skip about in play; to frolic. noun A skipping or leaping about in frolic. [In Middle French, the noun ""gambade"" referred to the frisky spring of a jumping horse. In the early 1500s, the English word ""gambol"" romped into print as both a verb and a noun. (The noun means ""a skipping or leaping about in play."") The English word is not restricted to horses, but rather can be used of any frolicsome creature. It is a word that suggests levity and spontaneity, and it tends to be used especially of the lively activity of children or animals engaged in active play.] ""The children scamper and gambol about the playground with seemingly endless energy."""
redound \rih-DOWND\	"intransitive verb 1. To contribute to (someone's credit, honor, etc.). 2. To come back upon. [From Old French redonder (to overflow), from Latin redundare (to overflow), from red-/re- (back) + undare (to surge). Ultimately from the Indo-European root wed- (water, wet), which also gave us water, winter, hydrant, redundant, otter, and vodka. Earliest documented use: before 1382.] ""The Prime Minister stated that such an arrangement could redound to the benefit of Barbadians."" - Pipeline Link With T&T Soon?; The Barbados Advocate; Mar 11, 2012. ""MIT officials fear that the explosion in the harbor will redound badly on Tech."" - Janet Maslin; 'The Technologists' by Matthew Pearl; The New York Times; Feb 22, 2012."
asseverate \uh-SEV-uh-rayt\	"transitive verb To affirm or declare positively or earnestly. [From Latin asseverare (to declare in earnest), from severus (serious). Ultimately from the Indo-European root segh- (to hold), which is also the source of words such as hectic, scheme, scholar, and cathect.] ""I asseverate from experience that some of my correspondence opponents do make use of a program."" - Peter Gibbs; Pastimes: Chess; Birmingham Post (UK); Oct 9, 2004."
prink \PRINGK\	transitive verb To dress up; to deck for show.
bilious \BIL-yuhs\	adjective 1. Of or pertaining to bile; also: gastric distress. 2. Of a peevish disposition; ill-tempered.
foofaraw \FOO-fuh-raw\	noun 1. Excessive or flashy ornamentation or decoration. 2. A fuss over a matter of little importance.
faineant \fay-nay-AWN\	"adjective A do-nothing; idler. [From French fainéant, alteration of fait-néant (literally, does nothing), by folk etymology from faignant, present participle of faindre (to feign). So a mistaken assumption about the derivation of the word turned the original French faignant (feigning) into faineant (does nothing), the present form. In French history, many kings have been called les rois fainéants as the real power was in the hands of mayors of the palace.] ""Moved in equal parts by ambition, restlessness, and an impulse to do good, he has filled any and all roles abdicated by the faineant previous rectors."" - Jim Mora; Away With All This Bavardage [i.e. chatter]; Sunday Star-Times (Auckland, New Zealand); Oct 11, 1998. ""There will be a two-year hiatus while Mr O'Reilly does the building work and the notion of what to do while waiting has until recently been downright faineant."" - Edward Pearce; Market Garden PS; The Guardian (London, UK); Mar 7, 1995."
bombinate \BOM-buh-nayt\	"intransitive verb To make a humming or buzzing noise. [""Bombinate"" sounds like it should be the province of bombastic blowhards who bound up and bombard you with droning blather at parties—and it is. The word derives from the Greek word ""bombos,"" a term that probably originated as an imitation of a deep, hollow sound (the kind we would likely refer to as ""booming"" nowadays). Latin speakers rendered the original Greek form as ""bombus,"" and that root gave forth a veritable din of raucous English offspring, including not only ""bombinate,"" but also ""bomb,"" ""bombard,"" and ""bound"" (""to leap""). However, Latin ""bombus"" is not a direct ancestor of ""bombastic,"" which traces to ""bombyx,"" a Greek name for the silkworm.] ""Time passes in Suttree, but nothing and no one develops—excepting, perhaps, time itself in its running out. People fart around, they raise a little local hell, they marinate, they bombinate, they get carted off either to jail or to the morgue."" — From Peter Josyph's 2010 book Adventures in Reading Cormac McCarthy"
pleonasm \PLEE-uh-naz-uhm\	"noun The use of more words than those necessary to express an idea; redundancy. [From Latin pleonasmus, from Greek pleonasmos, from pleonazein (to be in excess), from pleon (more). First recorded use: 1610. Pleonasm is often used for emphasis, as in free gift, true fact, or revert back. While such repetition is discouraged, sometimes it becomes part of the language and is used idiomatically, as in a hot water heater.] ""Why some people walk around with a little dark cloud over their heads all the time, while others ceaselessly view the world through rose-colored glasses, to use a tired cliche ('tired cliche' is also a cliche, as well as a pleonasm, but what the heck)."" - Otto Penzler; What a Wonderful Year!; The New York Sun; Dec 28, 2005."
foundling \FOWND-ling\	noun A deserted or abandoned infant; a child found without a parent or caretaker.
bedizen \bih-DY-zuhn\	transitive verb To dress or adorn in gaudy manner.
nimiety \nih-MY-uh-tee\	"noun Excess or redundancy. [From Latin nimius (too much). Ultimately from the Indo-European root ne (not), which also gave us nil, null, not, never, nothing, nihilism, annihilate, and naughty. Earliest documented use: 1542.] ""As he said it, a nimiety of memories came back to him of the sick, the wounded, the dying: disease, war, famine, flood, fire, devastation."" - Chelsea Quinn Yarbro; A Feast in Exile; Tor; 2001."
hebetude \HEB-uh-tood-; -tyood\	"noun Mental dullness or sluggishness. [The dullness of ""hebetude"" tends to lean toward mental dullness, often marked by laziness or torpor. As such, it was a good word for one Queenslander correspondent, who wrote in a letter to the editor of the Weekend Australian of ""an epidemic of hebetude among young people who . . . are placing too great a reliance on electronic devices to do their thinking and remembering."" ""Hebetude"" comes from Late Latin ""hebetudo,"" which means pretty much the same thing as our word. It is also closely related to the Latin word for ""dull"" — ""hebes,"" which has extended meanings such as ""obtuse,"" ""doltish,"" and ""stupid."" Other ""hebe-"" words in English include ""hebetudinous"" (""marked by hebetude"") and ""hebetate"" (""to make dull"").]"
unguent \UNG-gwuhnt\	noun A salve for sores, burns, or the like; an ointment.
idyll \EYE-dl\	noun: 1. A simple descriptive work, either in poetry or prose, dealing with simple, rustic life; pastoral scenes; and the like. 2. A narrative poem treating an epic, romantic, or tragic theme. 3. A lighthearted carefree episode or experience. 4. A romantic interlude.
disquisition \dis-kwuh-ZISH-uhn\	noun A formal discourse on a subject.
gallimaufry \gal-uh-MAW-free\	"noun A hodgepodge; a jumble. [From Middle French galimafree (stew), probably from galer (to make merry) + mafrer (to gorge oneself).] ""I've got a gallimaufry of cosmetics bottles of various kinds."" - Caroline Kamp; How Do I Look?; The Independent (London, UK); May 21, 2005."
dulcet \DUHL-sit\	adjective 1. Melodious; harmonious. 2. Generally pleasing, soothing, or agreeable. 3. (Archaic) Sweet to the taste.
demur \dih-MUR\	intransitive verb 1. To object; to take exception. 2. To delay. noun 1. The act of demurring. 2. Objection. 3. Delay.
empyrean \em-pie-REE-un; -PEER-ee-\	noun 1. The highest heaven, supposed by the ancients to contain the pure element of fire. 2. The visible heavens; the firmament.
popinjay \POP-in-jay\	"noun A vain and talkative person. [Via French and Spanish from Arabic babbaga (parrot). The last syllable changed to jay because some thought the word referred to that bird instead of a parrot.] ""We Brits didn't really like the way in which Jose Mourinho introduced himself as the 'Special One' when he joined Chelsea as manager. Being a braggart is so un-British, don't you know -- even if you are gifted with a bit of flair. The 'Special One' ought to have been told we don't go in for flamboyance here. If we act the popinjay we can expect others to despise us behind their smiles."" - No Space for 'Special Ones'; Western Morning News (Plymouth, UK); Sep 21, 2007."
benison \BEN-uh-suhn; -zuhn\	noun Blessing; benediction.
disport \dis-PORT\	"verb 1. To divert or amuse (oneself). 2. To display (oneself) in a sportive manner: The picnickers disported themselves merrily on the beach. noun A diversion or amusement. [From Old French desporter (to divert), from dis- + porter (to carry).] ""On the island, as on a stage, the people of Paris disport themselves in every attitude of summer recreation."" - T.J. McNamara; Seurat's Grand Triumph of Light; New Zealand Herald; Jan 23, 2010."
troglodyte \TROG-luh-dyt\	noun 1. A member of a primitive people that lived in caves, dens, or holes; a cave dweller. 2. One who is regarded as reclusive, reactionary, out of date, or brutish.
embonpoint \ahn-bohn-PWAN\	noun Plumpness of person; stoutness.
abeyance \uh-BAY-uhn(t)s\	"noun 1. Suspension; temporary cessation. 2. A lapse in succession during which there is no person in whom a title is vested. [""Abeyance"" has something in common with ""yawn."" Today, ""yawn"" implies sleep or boredom, but years ago it could also signify longing or desire (""Full many men know I that yawn and gape after some fat and rich benefice"" — Thomas Hoccleve, 1420). The Old French word for ""yawn"" was ""baer,"" which joined the prefix ""a-"" (""in a state or condition of"") to form ""abaer,"" a verb meaning ""to expect"" or ""await."" There followed Anglo-French ""abeyance,"" which referred to a state of expectation — specifically, a person's expectation of inheriting a title or property. But when we adopted ""abeyance"" into English in the 16th century, we applied the expectation to the property itself: a property or title ""in abeyance"" is in temporary limbo, waiting to be claimed by a rightful heir or owner.]"
repine \rih-PINE\	"intransitive verb 1. To feel or express discontent. 2. To long for something. [In longing, one can ""repine over"" something (""repining over her lost past""), or one can ""pine for"" something. The two words, used thus, mean close to the same thing, but not exactly. ""Pining"" is intense longing for what one once knew. ""Repine"" adds an element of discontent to any longing -- an element carried over from its first sense (""to feel or express dejection or discontent""), which has been in use since the 16th century. (Washington Irving used the first sense in his 1820 work The Sketch Book: ""Through the long and weary day he repines at his unhappy lot."") ""Pine"" and ""repine"" are from Old English ""pinian"" (""to suffer"") and probably ultimately from Latin ""poena"" (""punishment""). ""Poena"" also gave us our word ""pain.""]"
ludic \LOO-dik\	"adjective Playful. [Here's a serious word, just for fun. That is to say, it means ""fun,"" but it was created in all seriousness around 1940 by psychologists. They wanted a term to describe what children do, and they came up with ""ludic activity."" That may seem ludicrous -- why not just call it ""playing""? -- but the word ""ludic"" caught on, and it's not all child’s play anymore. It can refer to architecture that is playful, narrative that is humorous and even satirical, and literature that is light. ""Ludic"" is ultimately from the Latin noun ""ludus,"" which refers to a whole range of fun things -- stage shows, games, sports, even jokes. The more familiar word ""ludicrous"" also traces back to the same source.] ""The members of the acting troupe had become well-known for their ludic behavior, evidenced by the practical jokes they played on each other off-stage."""
tatterdemalion \tat-ur-dih-MAIL-yuhn; -MAY-lee-uhn\	"noun A person dressed in tattered or ragged clothing; a ragamuffin. adjective Tattered; ragged. [From Middle English tater, from Old Norse toturr (rag). The origin of demalion is uncertain.] ""He might look like lord of all he surveys, but look closer: He's a tatterdemalion emperor, a dictator in rags constantly patrolling his hard-won fiefdom."" - Washington City Paper; Theater Review: Free Your Mind; May 17, 2007."
gamine \gam-EEN; GAM-een\	noun 1. A girl who wanders about the streets; an urchin. 2. A playfully mischievous girl or young woman.
recherche \ruh-sher-SHAY\	adjective 1. Uncommon; exotic; rare. 2. Exquisite; choice. 3. Excessively refined; affected. 4. Pretentious; overblown.
arcanum \ar-KAY-nuhm\	noun [plural arcana] 1. A secret; a mystery. 2. Specialized or mysterious knowledge that is hard to obtain.
ken \KEN\	"noun 1. Perception; understanding; knowledge. 2. The range of vision. 3. View; sight. [""Ken"" appeared on the English horizon in the 16th century as a term of measurement of the distance bounding the range of ordinary vision at sea — about 20 miles. British author John Lyly used that sense in 1580 when he wrote, ""They are safely come within a ken of Dover."" Other 16th-century writers used ""ken"" to mean ""range of vision"" (""Out of ken we were ere the Countesse came from the feast."" — Thomas Nash) or ""sight"" (""'Tis double death to drown in ken of shore."" — Shakespeare). Today, however, ""ken"" rarely suggests literal sight. Rather, ""ken"" nowadays almost always implies a range of comprehension, understanding, or knowledge.]"
hector \HEK-tur\	noun A bully transitive verb To intimidate or harass in a blustering way; to bully. intransitive verb To play the bully; to bluster.
deracinate \dee-RAS-uh-nayt\	transitive verb 1. To pluck up by the roots; to uproot; to extirpate. 2. To displace from one's native or accustomed environment.
plaintive \PLAIN-tiv\	adjective Expressive of sorrow or melancholy; mournful; sad.
agon \AH-gahn; ah-GOHN\	"noun [plural: agones] A contest or conflict, especially between the protagonist and antagonist in a literary work. [""Agon"" comes from the Greek word ""agōn,"" which is translated with a number of meanings, among them ""contest,"" ""competition at games,"" and ""gathering."" In ancient Greece, agons (also spelled ""agones"") were contests held during public festivals. The contests—among them the ancient Olympics that our modern Olympics is modeled on—involved everything from athletics to chariot and horse racing to music and literature. ""Agon"" in the realm of literature refers to the dramatic conflict between the main characters in a Greek play, or more broadly, between the chief characters in any literary work. The word is also occasionally used to refer to conflict generally, as in our first example sentence.] ""From the beginning of the agon, the play [The Merchant of Venice] provides an explanation for Shylock's behavior, well beyond the sheer antagonistic function that the skeletal plot would require and the sources provide."" — From G. Beiner's 1993 book Shakepeare's Agonistic Comedy: Poetics, Analysis, Criticism"
pablum \PAB-luhm\	noun Communication that is trite, insipid, or simplistic.
remonstrate \rih-MAHN-strayt; REH-mun-strayt\	"intransitive verb To reason or plead in protest. [From Latin remonstrare (to exhibit, demonstrate), from re- + monstrare (to show). Ultimately from the Indo-European root men- (to think), which is the source of mind, mnemonic, mosaic, music, mentor, money, mandarin, and mantra. Earliest documented use: 1601.] ""Ricky Ponting felt the need to remonstrate with the vigour of an innocent man sentenced to the electric chair."" - Andrew Webster; Captain on His Knees as Tourists Gloat; The Daily Telegraph (Sydney, Australia); Dec 28, 2010."
clerisy \KLER-uh-see\	"noun The well educated class; the intelligentsia. [From German Klerisei (clergy), from Medieval Latin clericia, from Late Latin clericus (cleric), from Greek klerikos (belonging to the clergy), from Greek kleros (inheritance). Ironically, clerisy and clerk have branched out from the same root, that is also the source for clergy and cleric.] ""The artist, the scholar, and, in general, the clerisy wins its way up into these places, and gets represented here, somewhat on this footing of conquest."" - Ralph Waldo Emerson; Manners; 1844."
etiolate \EE-tee-uh-late\	"transitive verb 1. To make pale, weak or stunted. 2. To make weak by stunting the growth or development of. [From French étioler (to make pale), from Latin stipula (straw). Earliest documented use: 1791.] ""America itself was a stunted universe where men etiolate and shrink."" - Herb Greer; Down With the Yanks! (Book Review); The World & I (Washington, DC); Feb 2004. ""Convinced republican that I am, and foe of the prince who talks to plants and wants to be crowned 'head of all faiths' as well as the etiolated Church of England, I find myself pierced by a pang of sympathy. Not much of a life, is it, growing old and stale with no real job except waiting for the news of Mummy's death?"" - Christopher Hitchens; Beware the In-Laws; Slate (New York); Apr 18, 2011. ""If the history of the American sentence were a John Ford movie, its second act would conclude with the young Ernest Hemingway walking into a saloon, finding an etiolated Henry James slumped at the bar in a haze of indecision, and shooting him dead."" - Adam Haslett; The Art of Good Writing; Financial Times (London, UK); Jan 21, 2011."
debouch \dih-BOWCH; -BOOSH\	"verb intr. 1. To march out from a narrow or confined place into an open area. 2. To emerge or issue from a narrow area into the open. [From French deboucher, from de- (out of) + boucher, from bouche (mouth), from Latin bucca (mouth or cheek). The word buckle (as in a belt) derives from the same Latin root.] ""Russia, the world's second-largest oil exporter, wants Central Asian resources to be transported across its territory. Iran, also an oil producer, wants the energy pipelines to debouch at its ports, the shortest route."" - Eric S. Margolis; Russia Checkmated Its New Best Friend; The Los Angeles Times; Nov 28, 2001."
maunder \MON-dur\	intransitive verb 1. To talk incoherently; to speak in a rambling manner. 2. To wander aimlessly or confusedly. [Of uncertain origin. Earliest documented use: 1622.] “Literary prizes in recent generations seem to go to maundering monuments to intentional obscurity, such as James Joyce’s Ulysses or Lawrence Durrell’s tour de force of labyrinthine inscrutability, the seemingly endless Alexandrine Quartets.” - Thomas P. Lowry; Owen Parry is Master of the Short Story; The Free Lance-Star (Fredericksburg, Virginia); Nov 27, 2004. “Last year Goran Ivanisevic maundered around the world, winning only 14 matches.” - Stephen Bierley; Genial Ivanisevic Takes a Walk on the Wild Side; The Guardian (London, UK); Jul 9, 2001.
imprecation \im-prih-KAY-shun\	noun 1. The act of imprecating, or invoking evil upon someone. 2. A curse.
vade mecum \vay-dee-MEE-kuhm; vah-dee-MAY-\	noun: 1. A book for ready reference; a manual; a handbook. 2. A useful thing that one regularly carries about.
skulduggery, also skullduggery \skul-DUG-uh-ree\	"noun Underhand dealing: trickery, bribery, etc. [An American coinage, apparently from the alteration of Scots sculduddery (fornication, obscenity). Earliest documented use: 1867.] ""In the 1980s [the Vatican Bank] was accused of involvement in financial skulduggery and responsibility for the still-mysterious death of a prominent Italian banker, Roberto Calvi."" - God's Bankers; The Economist (London, UK); Jul 7, 2012."
billet \BIL-it\	noun 1. Lodging for soldiers. 2. An official order directing that a soldier be provided with lodging. 3. A position of employment; a job.
redact \rih-DAKT\	"transitive verb 1. To draw up or frame (a proclamation, for example). 2. To make ready for publication; edit or revise. [Here's a quiz for all you etymology buffs. Can you pick the words from the following list that come from the same Latin root? A.redaction B.prodigal C.agent D.essay E.navigate F.ambiguous If you guessed all of them, you are right. Now, for bonus points, name the Latin root they all have in common. If you knew that was the verb ""agere,"" meaning to ""to drive, lead, act, or do,"" you get an A+. ""Redaction"" is from the Latin verb ""redigere"" (""to bring back"" or ""to reduce""), which was formed by adding the prefix ""red-"" (""back"") to ""agere."" Some other ""agere"" offspring include ""act,"" ""agenda,"" ""cogent,"" ""litigate,"" ""chasten,"" ""agile,"" and ""transact."" Middle English redacten, from Latin redigere, redact-, to drive back : re-, red-, re- + agere, to drive.]"
cavort \kuh-VORT\	intransitive verb 1. To bound or prance about. 2. To have a high-spirited, festive manner.
epicene \EP-uh-seen\	"adjective 1. Having the characteristics of both sexes. 2. Effeminate; unmasculine. noun A person or object that is epicene. [From Middle English, from Latin epicoenus, from Greek epikoinos, epi- + koinos, common.] ""`This time I've bought an epicene sweater so either of us can wear it!' Mrs. Fraugal chirped as she showed her husband the bright pink dress."""
concinnity \kuhn-SIN-uh-tee\	noun 1. Internal harmony of parts to a whole or to each other. 2. Studied elegance of design or arrangement -- used chiefly of literary style.
arrant \AR-unt\	"adjective 1. Notoriously extreme. 2. Complete; thorough. [Here's a word that has had both its spelling and meaning bent out of shape from use. It's a variant of errant (wandering). Earlier the word was used in the sense of wandering or vagrant, for example, an arrant thief or an arrant knave. Over time the word began to be taken as an intensifier so an arrant fool was no longer a vagrant fool, but a complete fool. Via French, from Latin iterare (to journey), from iter (journey). Ultimately from the Indo-European root ei- (to go), which is also the ancestor of words such as exit, transit, circuit, itinerary, obituary, and adit. Earliest documented use: 1386.] ""Norman Macrae also dismissed the Club of Rome's prediction that the world was about to run out of food as arrant nonsense."" - The Unacknowledged Giant; The Economist (London, UK); Jun 17, 2010."
dishabille \dis-uh-BEEL\	noun 1. The state of being carelessly or partially dressed. 2. Casual or lounging attire. 3. An intentionally careless or casual manner.
senescent \sih-NES-uhnt\	"adjective Growing old; aging. [Latin senescens, senescent-, present participle of senescere, to grow old, inchoative of senere, to be old, from senex, sen-, old. ""Senescence"" ultimately derives (via the verb ""senescere,"" meaning ""to grow old"") from the Latin ""senex,"" meaning ""old."" Can you guess which other English words come from ""senex""? ""Senile"" might come to mind, as well as ""senior."" But another one might surprise you: ""senate."" This word for a legislative assembly dates back to ancient Rome, where the ""Senatus"" was originally a council of elders composed of the heads of patrician families. There's also the much rarer ""senectitude,"" which, like ""senescence,"" refers to the state of being old (specifically, to the final stage of the normal life span).] ""The uplifter at the Christian Science Monitor was recently citing not only the senescent tennis stars but the nonagenarian lady who had climbed Mount Fuji."" - Daniel Seligman, Patty de Llosa, Keeping Up: Guess what's sacred at Stanford, the case for ageism, panhandler rights, and other matters. Fortune, 17 Dec 1990."
frangible \FRAN-juh-buhl\	"adjective Readily broken; breakable. [From Middle English, from Old French, from Medieval Latin frangibilis, from Latin frangere (to break). The same Latin root is responsible for breaking in a number of other words, such as chamfer, defray, fraction, refract, infringe, and fracture.] ""Wax discs are frangible: a lost flake is an irretrievable snippet of sonic memory."" - Alan Burdick, Now Hear This, Harper's Magazine (New York), Jul 2001. ""I can never read reviews of my own movies. I'm terrified to find out what the barbaric world thinks of my trembly filmic dreams and, by extension, my overly frangible soul."" - Guy Maddin, Very Lush and Full of Ostriches, The Village Voice (New York), Aug 7, 2001."
interlard \in-tur-LARD\	transitive verb To insert between; to mix or mingle; especially, to introduce that which is foreign or irrelevant; as, to interlard a conservation with oaths or allusions.
gadabout \GAD-uh-bout\	"noun One who roams around in search of amusement. [From gad (to go around from one place to another aimlessly). Earliest documented use: 1817.] ""The film charted Zelda Kaplan's transformation from homemaker to social gadabout flitting from party to party."" - Ruth La Ferla; Zelda Kaplan; The New York Times; Feb 18, 2012."
riposte \rih-POST\	"noun 1. A quick thrust given after parrying an opponent's lunge in fencing. 2. A quick and effective reply by word or act. [From obsolete French risposte (response), from Italian risposta (response), from Latin respondere (to respond), from re- (back) + spondere (to pledge). Ultimately from the Indo-European root spend- (to make an offering or perform a rite), which is also the source of sponsor, spouse, espouse, and respond. Earliest documented use: 1707.] ""Asked about the situation, Rodriguez delivered a particularly pointed riposte that embodied his mature response to the entire situation."" - Sam Borden; Kansas State Sets Up Melting Pot; The New York Times; Mar 16, 2012."
manse \MAN(T)S\	noun 1. A large and imposing residence. 2. The residence of a clergyman (especially a Presbyterian clergyman).
sere, also sear \SEER\	"adjective Dry; withered. [Variant spelling of Old English sear (dry). Earliest documented use: 824.] ""The duration of an organism's presence in a sere depends on its ability to persist, even as the environment is changing."" - Lawrence Walker; The Biology of Disturbed Habitats; Oxford University Press; 2012."
louche \LOOSH\	"adjective Of questionable character; dubious; disreputable. [From French louche (cross-eyed), from Latin lusca, feminine of luscus (one-eyed).] ""They wanted her to be a dancer, but the teenage Bardot fell in with the louche and devious film-maker Roger Vadim, and became the notorious Girl In A Bikini instead."" - Adam Sweeting; Zouzou Exposed; The Guardian (UK); Nov 7, 1998."
redolent \RED-uh-lunt\	"adjective 1. Fragrant; smelling. 2. Suggestive; reminiscent. [From Old French redolent (smelling), from Latin redolens, present participle of redolere (to give off a smell), from re- (intensive prefix) + olere (to smell). Earliest documented use: 1439.] ""There's a heavy dose of irony in the title of Wendy Cope's new book of poems, Family Values. In fact, the phrase, redolent of hypocritical politicians and the moral majority, makes her want to scream."" - Susan Mansfield; Look Back in Candour; The Scotsman (Edinburgh, Scotland); Apr 9, 2011."
blackguard \BLAG-urg\	noun 1. A rude or unscrupulous person; a scoundrel. 2. A person who uses foul or abusive language.
rivulet \RIV-yuh-lut\	noun A small stream or brook; a streamlet.
vatic \VAT-ik\	"adjective Prophetic; oracular. From Latin vates (prophet). Ultimately from the Indo-European root wet- (to blow or inspire) which is also the source of fan, atmosphere, Vatican, and Wednesday (literally, Woden's day, after a Norse god). ""'I know one day we will all die,' replied Adi, making a valiant stab at vatic foresight."" - Tom Sutcliffe; Not All of It Added Up; The Independent (London, UK); Jan 29, 2009."
dotage \DOH-tij\	noun A deterioration of mental faculties; senility. A venerable man, now in his dotage.
cudgel \KUH-juhl\	noun A short heavy stick used as a weapon; a club.
perorate \PEAR-uh-rayt\	intransitive verb 1. To conclude or sum up a long discourse. 2. To speak or expound at length; to declaim.
irenic \eye-REN-ik; -REE-nik\	"adjective Promoting peace or conciliation. [From Greek eirene (peace). Eirene/Irene was the Greek personification of peace.] ""Kate Neal's Hourly Scrutinising floated ecstatically, emphasising irenic calm and harmony."" - Peter McCallum; A Beautiful Darwinian Experience; The Sydney Morning Herald (Australia); Nov 21, 2009."
eremite \ER-uh-myt\	"noun A hermit, especially a religious recluse. [From Latin eremita, from Greek eremia (desert), from eremos (solitary).] ""Poor Joyce Maynard. Not since Martina Hingis submarined a serve to Steffi Graf in the French Open has a woman been so universally excoriated for underhanded conduct. And all Maynard did was sell a bunch of mash notes she had saved from a boyfriend of 27 years ago to raise college tuition for her children. Except that the boyfriend happened to be J.D. Salinger -- the eremite of Cornish, N.H."" - Mark Leyner; How to Avoid Salinger Syndrome; Time (New York); Jul 5, 1999."
fop \FOP\	noun A man who is overly concerned with or vain about his dress and appearance; a dandy.
oblation \uh-BLAY-shun; oh-\	noun 1. The act of offering something, such as worship or thanks, especially to a deity. 2. (usually capitalized) The act of offering the bread and wine of the Eucharist. 3. Something offered in a religious rite or as a charitable gift.
felicitous \fuh-LIS-uh-tuhs\	"adjective 1. Appropriate or apt. 2. Pleasing. [From Latin felix (happy). Earliest documented use: 1641.] ""As good actors age -- perhaps a more felicitous word would be mature -- they learn how to do more with less."" - Charles Isherwood; A Literary Life Can Turn Lonely When the Cheering Stops; The New York Times; Apr 29, 2010."
ne plus ultra \nee-plus-UL-truh; nay-\	noun 1. The pinnacle; the ultimate. 2. The most profound degree of a quality or condition.
bloviate \BLOH-vee-ayt\	intransitive verb To speak or write at length in a pompous or boastful manner.
rebarbative \ree-BAR-buh-tiv\	"adjective Irritating; repellent. [From French rebarbative (offputting), feminine form of rebarbatif, from rebarber (to be repellent), from barbe (beard), from Latin barba (beard). Are bearded people irritating? While some find a beard on a man attractive, literally speaking it could be like barbed wire - repelling - for others. In fact, the words barb, barber, and beard are derived from the same root as today's word.] ""From cosy Whitelaw to rebarbative Ingham, there are now over a dozen versions of the Thatcher decade by Thatcher's servants."" - Catherine Bennett; Tales From the Book Cabinet; The Guardian (London, UK); Oct 1, 1993. ""As Nixon and the boy who would one day become his rebarbative five o'clock shadow both understood, football is simply war by other means."" - Bruce Newman; Oliver Stone Goes to War Again, With Cleats On; The New York Times; Nov 14, 1999."
abattoir \AB-uh-twahr\	noun A slaughterhouse.
pervicacious \pur-vih-KAY-shus\	"adjective Stubborn; obstinate. [From Latin pervicax (stubborn). Earliest documented use: 1633.] ""Your grandmother had spunk, bless her pervicacious soul. ... She had a stubborn streak, you see, very stubborn."" - David Curry Kahn; Her Mother's Diary; Wheatmark; 2010."
solecism \SAH-luh-siz-um\	"noun 1. A nonstandard or ungrammatical usage, as unflammable and they was. 2. A breach of etiquette. 3. An error, inconsistency, or impropriety. [From Latin soloecismus, from Greek soloikismos, from soloikos (speaking incorrectly; literally, inhabitant of Soloi) after Soloi, an ancient Athenian colony in Cilicia where a dialect considered as substandard was spoken.] ""`Ah! Madam,' said Ovid, `how great a solecism would it be both in a lover and a poet if he did not look upon his mistress as the sublimest object of his thoughts!' - Benjamin Boyce and Thomas Brown; The Adventures of Lindamira: A Lady of Quality; The University of Minnesota Press; 1949. ""But the AAUP's (Association of American University Presses) guidelines go beyond correcting what it regards as solecisms to more drastic exercises in raising consciousness. Consider the traditional personification of ships as feminine. According to the AAUP task force, such usage is `quaint at best' and should be avoided: `it' is preferred. Along the same literalist lines, you should think twice before describing an important work by a woman scholar as `seminal'. - Speech Therapy; The Economist (London); Jun 3, 1995."
slugabed \SLUHG-uh-bed\	noun One who stays in bed until a late hour; a sluggard.
repast \rih-PAST\	noun Something taken as food; a meal.
spoonerism \SPOO-nuh-riz-uhm\	noun The transposition of usually initial sounds in a pair of words.
apposite \AP-uh-zit\	"adjective Very applicable or apt. [""Apposite"" and ""opposite"" sound so much alike that you would expect them to have a common ancestor -- and they do. It is the Latin verb ""ponere,"" which means ""to put or place."" Adding the prefix ""ad-"" to ""ponere"" created ""apponere,"" meaning ""to place near"" or ""to apply to,"" and that branch of the ""ponere"" family tree led to ""apposite."" The word is used to describe something that applies well to or is very appropriate for something else, a notion perhaps suggested by the close proximity of two objects. To get ""opposite,"" the prefix ""ob-"" was added to ""ponere"" to create ""opponere,"" meaning ""to place against or opposite."" The related verb ""componere,"" meaning ""to put together,"" gave us ""compound"" and ""composite.""] ""The Venetian merchants who travelled to other lands or cities were especially useful; it is apposite, too, that in a mercantile state, the language of merchants was used as a code."" -- From Peter Ackroyd's 2010 book Venice: Pure City"
propinquity \pruh-PING-kwih-tee\	"noun Nearness in space, time or relationship. [""Propinquity"" and its cousin ""proximity"" are related through the Latin root ""prope,"" which means ""near."" That root gave rise to ""proximus"" (the parent of ""proximity"") and ""propinquus"" (an ancestor of ""propinquity""). ""Proximus"" is the superlative of ""prope"" and thus means ""nearest,"" whereas ""propinquus"" simply means ""near"" or ""akin,"" but in English ""propinquity"" conveys a stronger sense of closeness than ""proximity."" (The latter usually suggests a sense of being in the vicinity of something.) The distinctions between the two words are subtle, however, and they are often used interchangeably. ""Propinquity"" is believed to be the older of the two words, first appearing in English in the 14th century; ""proximity"" followed a century later.] ""I believe that ... propinquity of descent, -- the only known cause of the similarity of organic beings, -- is the bond, hidden as it is by various degrees of modification, which is partially revealed to us by our classifications."""
badinage \bad-n-AHZH\	noun Light, playful talk; banter.
subfusc \sub-FUHSK\	adjective Dark or dull in color; drab, dusky. noun Dark, formal clothing worn at some universities for exams and special occasions.
jocund \JOCK-uhnd; JOH-kuhnd\	adjective Full of or expressing high-spirited merriment; light-hearted; mirthful.
ambit \AM-bit\	"noun Scope, range, limit, or boundary. [From Latin ambitus (going around), from ambire (to go around), from ambi- (both, around) + ire (to go). Ultimately from the Indo-European root ei- (to go), which also gave us exit, transit, circuit, itinerary, obituary, adit, and arrant. Earliest documented use: 1398.] ""President Buhari acted within the ambit of the law by taking his time to do a thorough job."" - Agenda for New Ministers; The Sun (Lagos, Nigeria); Oct 2, 2015."
wassail \WAH-sul; wah-SAYL\	"verb 1. To indulge in riotous drinking. 2. Chiefly British: to sing carols from house to house at Christmas. 3. To drink to the health or thriving of. [The salutation ""wassail,"" from the Old Norse toast ""ves heill"" (""be well""), has accompanied English toast-making since the 12th century. By the 13th century, ""wassail"" was being used for the drink itself, and it eventually came to be used especially of a hot drink (of wine, beer, or cider with spices, sugar, and usually baked apples) drunk around Christmastime. This beverage warmed the stomachs and hearts of many Christmas revelers and was often shared with Christmas carolers. The verb ""wassail"" was first used in the 14th century to describe the carousing associated with indulgence in the drink; later, it was used of other activities associated with wassail and the holiday season, like caroling. Seventeenth-century farmers added cattle and trees to the wassail tradition by drinking to their health or vitality during wintertime festivities.]"
doff \DOF\	transitive verb 1. To take off, as an article of clothing. 2. To tip or remove (one's hat). 3. To put aside; to rid oneself of.
irrefragable \ir-REF-ruh-guh-buhl\	"adjective Impossible to refute or dispute; incontrovertible. [From Late Latin irrefragabilis, from Latin in- (not) + refragari (to oppose). Ultimately from Indo-European root bhreg- (to break) that's also the progenitor of words such as break, breach, fraction, fragile, fractal, infringe, and suffrage. Suffrage? Remember, a broken piece of tile was used as a ballot in earlier times.] ""These issues were high on the agenda of the last American-Turkish talks. They were discussed thoroughly by the two sides many times and there were discords too. Thus George Bush won't give an irrefragable answer to these issues in Ankara."" - Hakob Chakrian; US President in Ankara For the NATO Summit; AZG Armenian Daily (Yerevan, Armenia); Jun 26, 2004. ""Anderson quite clearly asserts 'there was irrefragable evidence of use of equine growth hormone by at least one cyclist at the AIS Del Monte'."" - Inside the Shooting Gallery; The Sydney Morning Herald (Australia); Jul 10, 2004."
lugubrious \lu-GOO-bree-uhs; -GYOO-\	"adjective Mournful, dismal, especially in an exaggerated or affected manner. [From Latin lugere (to mourn).] ""Although the program notes characterize the piece as dark and lugubrious, it's actually rather playful and matter-of-fact, a reflection of Russian acceptance of life's inequalities and perils."" - Roy C. Dicks; Russian Reality (dance review); The News & Observer (Raleigh, North Carolina); Jun 16, 2007."
cormorant \KOR-mur-unt; -muh-rant\	"noun 1. Any of the seabirds of the family Phalacrocoracidae, having a hooked bill with a pouch under it, a long neck and webbed feet. 2. A greedy person. [Middle English cormeraunt, from Middle French cormorant, from Old French cormareng, from corp, raven + marenc, of the sea, from Latin marinus.] ""The source of these outrages is known, and if they are repeated I have Mr. Holmes's authority for saying that the whole story concerning the politician, the lighthouse, and the trained cormorant will be given to the public."" - Sir Arthur Conan Doyle, The Adventure of the Veiled Lodger."
bouleversement \bool-vair-suh-MAWN\	"noun Complete overthrow; a reversal; a turning upside down. [From French bouleversement (upheaval), from bouleverser (to overturn), from boule (ball) + verser (to turn).] ""The merger of the Chapters and Indigo bookstore chains began as a hostile takeover, a David-and-Goliath bouleversement in which small, scrappy Indigo toppled huge, swollen Chapters with a well-aimed shot."" - Rebecca Wigod; At Last, Canada Becomes a Genre; Vancouver Sun (Canada); Aug 25, 2001. ""The timing of this week's bouleversement in Brussels was rotten. It is less than a month since Prime Minister Tony Blair decided to break cover, stand up in the House of Commons, launch his 'national changeover plan,' and make it plain to anyone who had ever doubted it that he really did intend to lead Britain into the promised land of the euro, the single European currency. After a long period of cautious equivocation, the prime minister had, in his own words, 'shifted up a gear' ..."" - Walter Bagehot; Moses Blair And His Promised Euroland; The Economist (London, UK); Mar 20, 1999."
ukase \yoo-KAYS; -KAYZ; YOO-kays; -kayz\	"noun 1. In imperial Russia, a published proclamation or order having the force of law. 2. An arbitrary proclamation or order; edict. [After ukaz, a decree issued by a Russian czar having the force of law. From French, from Russian ukaz (decree), from Old Church Slavonic ukazu (proof), from ukazati, from u- (at, away) + kazati (to show).] ""Guardian journalists are to be discouraged from signing petitions, speaking at public meetings, joining marches or, heaven forbid, standing for parliament, a ukase that would have dramatically affected the political ambitions of C P Scott, Morgan Phillips Price, Lena Jeger, Martin Linton, Polly Toynbee, Malcolm Dean, Christopher Huhne and, indeed, the present writer."" - Richard Gott, The Lost Magic of Manchester, The New Statesman (London), Jan 28, 2002."
rapport \ra-POR; ruh-\	noun A relation, especially one characterized by sympathetic understanding, emotional affinity, or mutual trust.
wayworn \WAY-worn\	adjective Wearied by traveling.
gewgaw \G(Y)OO-gaw\	noun A showy trifle; a trinket; a bauble.
atelier \at-l-YAY\	noun A workshop; a studio.
vim \VIM\	"noun Power; energy; vigor. [From Latin vis (strength, energy, force).] ""Watford, playing with enthusiasm and vim, had dominated the opening minutes."" - Tim Collings; Watford Suffer Sinking Feeling; The Independent (London, UK); Dec 31, 2006."
parlous \PAR-luhs\	adjective Hazardous.
quiddity \KWID-ih-tee\	"noun 1. The distinctive peculiarity of a thing. 2. A hairsplitting distinction; a trifling point; a quibble. 3. An eccentricity; an odd feature. [When it comes to synonyms of ""quiddity,"" the Q's have it. Consider ""quintessence,"" a synonym of the ""essence of a thing"" sense of ""quiddity"" (this oldest sense of ""quiddity"" dates from the 14th century). ""Quibble"" is a synonym of the ""trifling point"" sense; that meaning of ""quiddity"" arose from the subtler points of 16th-century academic arguments. And ""quirk,"" like ""quiddity,"" can refer to a person's eccentricities. Of course, ""quiddity"" also derives from a ""Q"" word, the Latin pronoun ""quis,"" which is one of two Latin words for ""who"" (the other is ""qui""). ""Quid,"" the neuter form of ""quis,"" gave rise to the Medieval Latin ""quidditas,"" which means ""essence,"" a term that was essential to the development of the English ""quiddity.""] ""I would give Mark a perfect 10 if he did not use an old joke that belonged to Mickey Mantle that didn't even get a laugh. A quiddity to be sure but enough to jolt me out of my reverie."" — From a theater review by Harvey Sid Fisher at hollywoodtoday.net, June 8th, 2012"
descant \DES-kant\	"verb 1. To talk tediously. 2. To sing or play a descant. noun 1. A comment on a subject. 2. An ornamental melody sung or played above a basic melody. [From Latin discantus (refrain), from dis- (apart, away) + cantus (song), from canere (to sing). Ultimately from the Indo-European root kan- (sing), which also gave us hen, chant, accent, enchant, incentive, recant, cantor, and charm. Earliest documented use: 1380.] ""These disappointments were descanted on, bitterly and frequently."" - John Gross; Lessons of an Immoderate Master; The New York Review of Books; Jun 26, 1997."
rictus \RIK-tuhs\	noun 1. The gape of the mouth, as of birds. 2. A gaping grin or grimace.
fetid \FET-id; FEE-tid\	adjective Having a heavily offensive smell.
cavil \KAV-uhl\	intransitive verb To raise trivial or frivolous objections; to find fault without good reason. transitive verb To raise trivial objections to. noun A trivial or frivolous objection.
compunction \kuhm-PUHNK-shuhn\	"noun 1. Anxiety or deep unease caused by guilt. 2. A sting of conscience or a twinge of uneasiness; a qualm; a scruple. [An old proverb says ""a guilty conscience needs no accuser,"" and it's true that the sting of a guilty conscience — or a conscience that is provoked by the contemplation of doing something wrong — can prick very hard indeed. The sudden guilty ""prickings"" of compunction are reflected in the word's etymological history. ""Compunction"" comes from the Latin ""compunctus,"" the past participle of ""compungere,"" which means ""to prick hard"" or ""to sting."" ""Compungere,"" in turn, derives from ""pungere,"" meaning ""to prick,"" which is the ancestor of some other prickly words in English, such as ""puncture"" and even ""point.""]"
pule \PYOOL\	intransitive verb To whimper; to whine.
Capon \KAY-pon\	noun A male chicken castrated when young to improve the quality of its flesh for food.
venal \VEE-nuhl\	"adjective 1. Capable of being bought: open to bribery. 2. Of or related to bribery. [If you are given the choice between acts that are ""venal"" and those that are ""venial,"" go for the venial. Although the two words look and sound alike, they have very different meanings and histories. ""Venal"" demonstrates the adage that anything can be had if the price is high enough and the morals are low enough. That word originated with the Latin ""venum,"" which simply referred to something that was sold or for sale. Some of those transactions must have been rather shady, because by the mid-1600s, ""venal"" had gained the sense of corruption it carries today. ""Venial"" sins, on the other hand, are pardonable, the kind that show that everyone makes mistakes sometimes. That forgiving term descends from ""venia,"" Latin for ""favor,"" ""indulgence,"" or ""pardon.""] ""Named in honour of one of the most notoriously venal and corrupt banking groups of all time, the motor yacht Medici was the perfect status toy."" - David Chaplin; How the Medici Sunk Bridgecorp; The New Zealand Herald (Auckland); Sep 15, 2010."
sough \SAU; SUHF\	intransitive verb To make a soft, low sighing or rustling sound, as the wind. noun A soft, low rustling or sighing sound.
impassible \im-PASS-uh-bul\	"adjective Unfeeling, or not showing feeling (in a good or bad way); without sensation. [Middle English, from Old French, from Late Latin impassibilis : in-, not + passibilis, passible.] ""At the sound of the gold, Aramis raised his eyes, and Porthos started; as to Athos, he remained impassible."" - Dumas, Alexandre, Three Musketeers: Chapter XLVIII."
gaucherie \goh-shuh-REE\	noun A lack of tact or grace; also an instance of this. [From French gauche (literally left-handed, awkward), from gauchir (to turn). Earliest documented use: 1798.] “Also typical of modern Americans is Trump’s bad taste. ... He puts his own individual stamp on gaucherie.” - PJ O’Rourke; Garish Tastes, Awful Hair; The Daily Beast (New York); Jun 16, 2015.
osculate \AHSS-kyuh-layt\	"verb To kiss. [""Osculate"" comes from the Latin noun ""osculum,"" meaning ""kiss"" or ""little mouth."" It was included in a dictionary of ""hard"" words in 1656, but we have no evidence that anyone actually used it until the 19th century, except for scientists who used it differently, to mean ""contact."" Today, ""osculate"" is used in geometry for the action of a pair of curves or surfaces that touch so that they have a common tangent at the point of contact. When ""osculate"" is used to mean ""kiss,"" the context is often humorous.] “Angrat enjoyed the rest of their day in the swamp, as Beneficent grabbed one frog after another and eagerly osculated each amphibian on its little froggy nose. As always, Angrat marveled at her sister’s eagerness to embrace any tall tale. Nothing came out of the smooches.” - D.E. Park; Unwashed Fiction; Lulu Press; 2015."
quidnunc \KWID-nungk\	"noun A nosy or gossipy person. [From Latin quid nunc (what now), implying someone constantly asking ""What's new?""] ""Naturally, the only time these messages pop up is when quidnunc co-workers are nearby."" - Christopher Muther; Entertainment by the Foot; The Boston Globe; Jul 10, 2003."
gloaming \GLOH-ming\	"noun Twilight; dusk; the fall of the evening. [If ""gloaming"" makes you think of tartans and bagpipes, well lads and lasses, you've got a good ear and a good eye; we picked up ""gloaming"" from the Scottish dialects of English back in the Middle Ages. The roots of the word trace to the Old English word for twilight, ""glom,"" which is akin to ""glowan,"" an Old English verb meaning ""to glow."" In the early 1800s, English speakers looked to Scotland again and borrowed the now-archaic verb ""gloam,"" meaning ""to become twilight"" or ""to grow dark.""] ""The book is a marked departure from previous (Robert) Harris works set in the chill gloaming of mid-20th-century European history, an era that has fascinated him since he was a child."" - Alan Cowell; A Writer's Allegories For Today; International Herald Tribune (Paris, France); Nov 18, 2003."
Hogmanay \hog-muh-NAY; HOG-muh-nay\	noun The name, in Scotland, for New Year's Eve, on which children go about singing and asking for gifts; also, a gift, cake, or treat given on New Year's Eve.
obdurate \OB-duh-rit; -dyuh-\	"adjective 1. Stubborn: not easily moved. 2. Hard-hearted: resistant to emotions. From Latin obdurare (to harden), from durus (hard). Ultimately from the Indo-European root deru- (to be firm) that's the source of such other words as truth, trust, betroth, tree, endure, druid, during, durable, duress, trow, and indurate.] ""The White Paper outlines no strategy to end government's obdurate resistance to proper pricing of passenger services."" - Raghu Dayal; Whither is Fled, Railways' Visionary Gleam? The Economic Times (New Delhi, India); Feb 23, 2010."
macédoine \mass-uh-DWAHN\	"noun 1. A confused mixture; medley. 2. A mixture of fruits or vegetables served as a salad or cocktail or in a jellied dessert or used in a sauce or as a garnish. [From French macédoine, from Macédoine (Macedonia). The reference is to the Balkan area of many different territories and ethnic groups that Alexander the Great welded into a single unit.] ""So in her own home -- where raspberries and tiny fraises des bois grow in the garden -- a frequent dessert is an artless salad or macedoine of cut-up fruit, such as peaches, nectarines, or apricots, with a few berries thrown into the mix."" - Karola Saekel; Alice Waters's Newest Showcases Fresh Fruit; San Francisco Chronicle; May 8, 2002. ""There are similar impulses in Art Nouveau Bing, the English Aesthetic and American Arts and Crafts movements, the Vienna Secession -- and the style moderne of Czarist Russia, which mixed them all together in a macedoine."" - Margo Miller; The Man Who Made Art Nouveau; Boston Globe; Sep 11, 1987."
mollycoddle \MAH-lee-kah-dul\	verb To treat with an excessive or absurd degree of indulgence or attention
lycanthropy \lye-KAN-thruh-pee\	noun 1. A delusion that one has become a wolf. 2. The assumption of the form and characteristics of a wolf held to be possible by witchcraft or magic.
inhere \in-HEER\	verb To be inherent: to be a fixed element or attribute
encomium \en-KOH-mee-um\	"noun Glowing praise. [From Latin encomium, from Greek enkomion, from komos (revel).] ""The speech cheered the faithful no end, as did Sarah Brown's smooth and skilful introduction of her husband. Yet though her encomium went down well with the party, it nauseated many television viewers."" - Ruth Dudley Edwards; Why Mrs Brown Should Have Skipped the Heroics; Irish Independent (Dublin); Oct 4, 2009."
natant \NAY-tunt\	adjective Swimming or floating in water.
rugose \ROO-gohss\	adjective 1. Full of wrinkles. 2. Having the veinlets sunken and the spaces between elevated.
handsel \HAN-sul\	"noun 1. A gift to express good wishes at the beginning of a new year or enterprise. 2. Money given by a buyer to a seller to bind a bargain. [From Old English handselen (giving into hand), from hand + selen (the action of giving, gift). Earliest documented use: 1450.] ""Suddenly she thrusts something at him. A small paper packet tied with string. 'A handsel.' she says. 'For Miss Whyte.'"" - Joan Thomas; Curiosity; McClelland & Stewart; 2010. ""The School was handselled with two unique archival gifts."" - Margaret A. Mackay; Hamish Scott Henderson; Folklore (London, UK); Oct 2002."
blench \BLENCH\	verb Flinch
limn \LIM\	"verb 1. To portray in words. 2. To draw or paint, especially in outline. [Via French, from Latin luminare (to illuminate), from lumen (light). Ultimately from the Indo-European root leuk- (light), which is also the source of words such as lunar, lunatic, light, lightning, lucid, illuminate, illustrate, translucent, lux, lynx, and lucubrate. Earliest documented use: 1440.] ""'And if they put Jews into gas chambers in the Soviet Union, it is not an American concern,' Mr. Kissinger insists. 'Maybe a humanitarian concern.' More than limning Nixon's place in history, the line reveals Mr. Kissinger's genius for playing the lackey to power."""
crural \KRUR-ul\	adjective Relating to the leg, especially the femor. [From Latin crus (leg). Earliest documented use: 1599.] She could tell by his occasional grimace that her massage of his crural muscle above the patella on his right knee still caused him discomfort. - Kenneth Johnson; V: The Second Generation; Tor; 2008.
vitiate \VISH-ee-ayt\	"verb 1. To impair or spoil the effectiveness of. 2. To corrupt. [From Latin vitiare (to spoil, injure), from vitium (blemish). Earliest recorded use: 1534.] ""The peaceful atmosphere at the school was vitiated as a police constable in an inebriated condition created a scene there."""
baroque \buh-ROHK\	adjective, often capitalized 1. Of or relating to a style of art and music marked by complex forms and bold ornamentation. 2. Characterized by grotesqueness, extravagance, complexity, or flamboyance. 3. Irregularly shaped.
spindrift \SPIN-drift\	noun 1. Sea spray; especially: spray blown from waves during a gale. 2. Fine wind-borne snow or sand.
terreplein \TAIR-uh-playn\	noun The level space behind a parapet of a rampart where guns are mounted.
delate \dih-LAYT\	"verb To report (an offense), denounce, or accuse. [From Latin delatus, past participle of deferre (to bring down, accuse, or report), from de- + ferre (to bear), which is ultimately from the Indo-European root bher- (to carry, to bear children) that gave birth to words such as basket, suffer, fertile, burden, bring, bear, offer, prefer, and birth.] ""But how would the papal spies, who were present in every audience, delate him [Angelo Giuseppe Roncalli]?"" - Thomas Cahill; Pope John XXIII (biography); Viking; 2002."
pukka \PUCK-uh\	adjective Genuine, authentic; also: first-class.
glaucous \GLAW-kus\	"adjective 1 a) Of a pale yellow-green color b) Of a light bluish-gray or bluish-white color. 2. Having a powdery or waxy coating that gives a frosted appearance and tends to rub off. [From Latin glaucus (bluish-gray or green), from Greek glaukos.] ""Ichabod wants to investigate a series of murders in the village of Sleepy Hollow, where bleak forests and glaucous mists suggest Brigadoon* beset by toxic waste."" - Joe Morgenstern; Tim Burton's Version Of Sleepy Hollow Is Both Sleepy and Hollow; The Wall Street Journal (New York); Nov 19, 1999."
plumply \PLUMP-lee\	adverb In a wholehearted manner and without hesitation or circumlocution; forthrightly.
sockdolager \sock-DAH-lih-jer\	"noun 1. Something that settles a matter; a decisive blow or answer; finisher. 2. Something outstanding or exceptional. [Of unknown origin, apparently from sock. This sockdolager of a word has an unusual claim to fame in the US history. It turned out to be the cue on which John Wilkes Booth fired his shot at President Abraham Lincoln. Lincoln was watching the play ""Our American Cousin"" in Ford's Theater on that fateful night. His killer, Booth, an actor himself and aware of the dialog, knew the line that brought the loudest burst of laughter from the audience was: ""Well, I guess I know enough to turn you inside out, you sockdologising old man-trap."" Booth fired his gun at that precise moment to muffle the loud noise of his shot with the guffaws from the audience.] ""This year's storm was a sockdolager. The white stuff pounded the East Coast."" - Be Prepared, Richmond Times-Dispatch (Richmond, Virginia), Jan 17, 1996."
fatuous \FATCH-oo-us\	adjective Complacently or inanely foolish: silly.
quodlibet \KWAHD-luh-bet\	"noun 1. A subtle argument, especially on a theological or philosophical issue. 2. A musical medley: a whimsical combination of popular tunes. [Whatever. Try to get philosophical nowadays and that may be the response you hear. Someone quibbling over a minor philosophical or theological point 500 years ago might have gotten basically the same reaction, but in Latin. At least it seems that way, since the Latin ""quodlibet,"" meaning ""any whatever,"" was the name given to such academic debates. ""Quodlibet"" is a form of ""quilibet,"" from ""qui,"" meaning ""what,"" and ""libet,"" meaning ""it pleases."" We can't say with certainty how ""quodlibet"" went from disputations to musical conglomerations, but English speakers have been using ""quodlibet"" for light musical mélanges since the mid-19th century. From Latin quodlibetum, from Latin quod (what) + libet (it pleases), meaning ""whatever pleases"". Earlier the term referred to a mock exercise in discussion. Sense 2 arose from its use in German to refer to a gallimaufry of light-hearted musical compositions.] ""Someone was sending me a signal. If words are unimportant, punctuation is something even more lowly. Why worry about such quodlibets? When was the last time anyone even noticed?"" - Charles R. Larson; Its Academic, Or Is It?; Newsweek (New York); Nov 6, 1995. ""The swirling mist of sound [pianist Joanna MacGregor] made of the end of the penultimate quodlibet was almost shocking."" - Rian Evans; Joanna MacGregor: St George's, Bristol; The Guardian (London, UK); Feb 5, 2005."
pink \PINK\	verb 1. a) To perforate in an ornamental pattern b) To cut a saw-toothed edge on. 2. a) Pierce, stab b) To wound by irony, criticism, or ridicule.
intestate \in-TESS-tayt\	adjective 1. Having made no valid will. 2. Not disposed of by a will.
causerie \kohz-REE\	"noun 1. An informal conversation: chat. 2. A short informal essay. [""Causerie"" first appeared in English in the early 19th century, and it can be traced back to the French ""causer"" (""to chat"") and ultimately to the Latin ""causa"" (""cause, reason""). The word was originally used to refer to a friendly or informal conversation. Then, in 1849, the author and critic Charles-Augustin Sainte-Beuve began publishing a weekly column devoted to literary topics in the French newspaper Le Constitutionnel. These critical essays were called ""Causeries du lundi"" (""Monday chats"") and were later collected into a series of books of the same name. After that, the word ""causerie"" acquired a second sense in English, referring to a brief, informal article or essay. ]"
slough \SLUFF\	verb 1. To cast off or become cast off. 2. To crumble slowly and fall away. 3. To get rid of or discard as irksome, objectionable, or disadvantageous -- usually used with off.
ennead \EN-ee-ad\	noun A group of nine [From Greek enneas, ennead-, from ennea (nine).]
marmoreal \marh-MOR-ee-ul\	"adjective Of, relating to, or suggestive of marble or a marble statue especially in coldness or aloofness. [From Latin marmoreus (made of marble) from marmor (marble). Earliest documented use: 1798.] ""Bernhard Schlink's intelligent book [The Reader] has been frozen in marmoreal stillness."" - David Denby; Curious Cases; The New Yorker; Feb 9, 2009."
comminute \KAH-muh-noot\	verb To reduce to minute particles: pulverize.
bibelot \BEE-buh-loh\	noun A small household ornament or decorative object: trinket.
holus-bolus \hoh-lus-BOH-lus\	adverb All at once.
daedal \DEE-dul\	adjective 1. a) Skillful, artistic b) Intricate. 2. Adorned with many things.
jacquerie \zhah-kuh-REE\	"noun A peasants' revolt. [The first jacquerie was an insurrection of peasants against the nobility in northeastern France in 1358, so-named from the nobles' habit of referring contemptuously to any peasant as ""Jacques,"" or ""Jacques Bonhomme."" It took some time -- 150 years -- for the name of the first jacquerie to become a generalized term for other revolts. The term is also occasionally used to refer to the peasant class, as when Madame Defarge in Dickens' A Tale of Two Cities tells her husband to ""consider the faces of all the world that we know, consider the rage and discontent to which the Jacquerie addresses itself with more and more of certainty every hour.""] ""In light of inadequate social safety nets and the probability of further economic turndowns, the regime's fear of an anti-government jacquerie is not far-fetched."""
defile \dih-FYLE\	verb To march off in a line.
eleemosynary \el-ih-MAH-suh-nair-ee\	"adjective Relating to charity. [From Latin eleemosynarius, from eleemosyna (alms), from Greek eleemosyne (pity, charity), from eleemon (pitiful), from eleos (pity).] ""The Guzmans started their non-profit organization, Path of Hope Foundation, 18 years ago. Their single goal: to care for the poor who live near their corner. The Thanksgiving dinner is one of their eleemosynary events."" - Lynn Seeden; Free Thanksgiving Dinner Feeds 1,400; Orange County Register (Santa Ana, California); Dec 4, 2003."
empyreal \em-pye-REE-ul\	"adjective 1. Relating to the highest heaven, believed to contain pure light or fire. 2. Relating to the sky; celestial. 3. Sublime; elevated. [From Medieval Latin empyreus, from Greek empyrios (fiery), from pur (fire). Other words derived from the same root are fire, pyre, pyrosis (heartburn), and pyromania (an irresistible impulse to set things on fire).] This is where the idiom ""to be in the seventh heaven"" (a state of great bliss) comes from. In the Muslim and cabalist beliefs, heavens comprise a system of concentric spheres, the seventh heaven being the highest and a place of pure bliss. ""Into the Heaven of Heavens I have presumed, An earthly guest, and drawn empyreal air."" - John Milton; Paradise Lost: The Seventh Book. ""Holland enriches trumpeter Kenny Wheeler's wafting, empyreal work 'Angel Song' (ECM), which also features omnipresent guitarist Bill Frisell."" - Jim Fusilli; Rock 'n' Roll's Year in Review; The Wall Street Journal (New York); Dec 31, 1997."
qua \KWAH\	"preposition In the capacity or character of: as. [From Latin qua, from qui (who).] ""Their old standing friends, qua individuals and groups, have to unite and wage a worldwide campaign that should equal the protests that are being made against G8, WTO, IMF, World Bank etc."" - M B Naqvi; Immoral and Illegal; The Daily Star (Dhaka, Bangladesh); Jul 19, 2004. ""Fifth, the self-perpetuating tendencies of educational institutions, qua institutions, should never go unchallenged when they perpetuate socially disputable functions."" - Philip L. Smith; Mind: Anticipation and Chaos (book reviews); Philosophy East and West (Honolulu, Hawaii); Jan 1, 1995."
animadversion \an-uh-mad-VER-zhun\	"noun 1. The act of criticizing. 2. An unfavorable comment. [From Latin animadvertere (to turn the mind to), from animus (mind) + advertere (to turn). Ultimately from the Indo-European root wer- (to turn or bend), also the source of wring, weird, writhe, revert, universe, wroth, , conversazione, versicolor, and prosaic . Earliest documented use: 1535.] ""This newspaper has never felt that it is above criticism, especially from politicians and other public officials who take the brunt of our animadversion."" - PM, Beware the Danger of Attacking the Media; Jamaica Observer (Kingston); Dec 9, 2011."
canicular \kuh-NIK-yuh-ler\	adjective Of or relating to the dog days (the period between early July and early September when the hot sultry weather of summer usually occurs in the northern hemisphere).
trichology \trih-KAH-luh-jee\	"noun The study and treatment of hair and its disorders. [Greek: tricho- (hair), -logy (science, study)] ""Svenson [hair salon] claims, it is at the forefront of up-to-date trichology."" - Susanna Tjokro; Pamper Yourself With Various Hair Treatments; The Jakarta Post (Indonesia); Jun 2, 2002."
chorography \kuh-RAH-gruh-fee\	noun 1. The art of describing or mapping a region or district. 2. A description or map of a region; also: the physical conformation and features of such a region.
florilegium \flor-uh-LEE-jee-um\	"noun A volume of writings: anthology. [Neo-Latin florilegium, equivalent to Latin flori- + leg(ere) to gather + -ium, on the model of spicilegium gleaning; a calque of Greek anthologia, anthology] ""One of the most telltale of these is the ever-growing popularity of the digest, the epitome, the florilegium, the anthology."" - Green, Peter, The Oxford Book of Classical Verse in Translation (book reviews), The New Republic, 19 Feb 1996."
expatiate \ek-SPAY-shee-ayt\	"verb 1. To move about freely or at will: wander. 2. To speak or write at length or in detail. [From Latin exspatiatus, past participle of exspatiari (to wander or digress), from ex- (out) + spatiari (to walk about), from spatium (space).] ""I spent part of the day of the debate watching a parade of talking heads expatiate endlessly on how dire was the need for Obama to go macho."" - Joe Klein; Hit Her Again! Time (New York); Oct 31, 2007."
sparge \SPAHRJ\	verb 1. Sprinkle, bespatter; especially: spray. 2. To agitate (a liquid) by means of compressed air or gas entering through a pipe.
philoprogenitive \fill-uh-proh-JEN-uh-tiv\	adjective 1. Tending to produce offspring: prolific 2. Of, relating to, or characterized by love of offspring
tantivy \tan-TIV-ee\	"adverb In a headlong dash: at a gallop. [Of obscure origin, perhaps from the sound of a galloping horse's feet.] ""But both the book and the exhibit show clearly that along with these changes in diet, sport and exercise had an early start and a long run among the tangled tantivy of 19th-century cures, cons, leeches, preachers, drugs, zaps, baths, diets, teetotaling, indoor plumbing, ventilation, and `Spanish Nerve Grains' that stampeded Americans into our current obsession with fitness."" - Christina Robb, Exercists America's Longtime Pursuit of Fitness, The Boston Globe, Mar 13, 1988."
jackleg \JACK-leg\	adjective 1. Unprofessional quality and ethics; amateur. 2. Makeshift.
skosh \SKOHSH\	"noun A small amount. [From Japanese sukoshi (a little). Earliest documented use: 1955.] ""The obesity rate would have been 30.2% for women in that age group -- again, just a skosh lower than the actual rate of 30.4%."" - Karen Ravn; We're Fat Because ...; Los Angeles Times; Jul 14, 2008."
pachydermatous \pack-ih-DER-muh-tuss\	adjective 1. Of or relating to the pachyderms. 2. a) Thick, thickened. b) Callous, insensitive.
bardolater \bar-DAH-luh-ter\	noun A person who idolizes Shakespeare.
brachiate \BRAY-kee-ayt\	"verb To progress by swinging from hold to hold by the arms. [From Latin brachiatus (having arms), from brachium (arm), from Greek brakhion (upper arm). Ultimately from the Indo-European root mregh-u- (short) that is also the source of brief, abbreviate, abridge, brassiere, and brumal.] ""Thick-furred, with a red face, the monkey moves by sprawling out and brachiating from branch to branch through the high forest canopy."" - Roger Rosenblatt; Earth's Green Gown; Time (New York); Jun 17, 2004. ""The new superfriends head out on their first missions: the isotope feint and a related museum heist, which allows Sydney to dress in cat-burglar clothes and brachiate around an unguarded exhibition."" - Virginia Heffernan; Yet More of One Face in Season 4 of 'Alias'; The New York Times; Jan 5, 2005."
usufruct \YOO-zuh-frukt\	"noun The right to use and enjoy another's property without destroying it. [From Latin ususfructus, from usus et fructus (use and enjoyment). Earliest documented use: 1646.] ""It is currently in the process of purchasing perpetual usufruct rights to a number of plots."""
cloying \KLOY-ing\	adjective Disgusting or distasteful by reason of excess; also: excessively sweet or sentimental.
zeugma \ZOOG-muh\	noun The use of a word to modify two or more words in such a way that it applies to each in a different sense or makes sense with only one. to wage war and peace or On his fishing trip, he caught three trout and a cold.
skimble-skamble	adjective Rambling and confused: senseless.
founder \FOUN-der\	verb 1. To make or become disabled or lame. 2. To collapse. 3. To sink. 4. To fail.
chef-d'oeuvre \shay-DOO-vruh)\	"noun A masterpiece. [From French chef-d'oeuvre (masterpiece), from chef (chief) + oeuvre (work).] ""Not every item is a chef d'oeuvre: The Surrealists loved to create collages from trivial snapshots."" - Jorg von Uthmann; Kinky Dolls, Glass Tears Adorn Surrealist Photo Show; Bloomberg; Oct 29, 2009."
roman à clef \roh-mahn-ah-KLAY\	"noun A novel that depicts (usually famous) real people and events under the guise of fiction. [From French roman à clef, literally, a novel with a key. All fiction has a grain of truth, but a roman a clef has it by the bushel. Roman a clef dates back to seventeenth century France. In the beginning, a roman a clef really did have a key that was published separately. In these times, you can simply go on the Internet and search using Google. An example of roman a clef is Ernest Hemingway's The Sun Also Rises. These days the term can apply to any work of fiction, for example, a movie, not just a novel. A blend term ""faction"" has also been used, after ""fact"" presented as ""fiction"".] ""[Geraldine] Brooks has borrowed details not just from Little Women but from the story of Alcott's own extraordinary father, Bronson Alcott, a man whose freethinking, utopian views were all downplayed in his daughter's roman a clef."" - Michelle Griffin; March; Sydney Morning Herald (Australia); Apr 2, 2005."
occiput \AHK-sih-put\	"noun The back part of the head or skull. [From Latin occipit, from oc-, from ob- (against) + ciput, from caput (head).] Senator Smoot (Republican, Ut.) Is planning a ban on smut. Oh rooti-ti-toot for Smoot of Ut. And his reverend occiput. Smite, Smoot, smite for Ut., Grit your molars and do your dut., Gird up your l--ns, Smite h-p and th-gh, We'll all be Kansas By and by. (Opening para of Ogden Nash's 1931 poem on Sen. Reed Smoot whose anti-porn stance led to a newspaper headline ""Smoot Smites Smut"".)"
effrontery \ih-FRUN-tuh-ree\	"noun Shameless boldness; presumptuousness. [From French effronterie, from effronté (shameless), from Latin effrons (barefaced, shameless), from ex- (out of, from) + frons (forehead, brow).] ""The effrontery of such pedestrian politicos to display their appetite for power and authority is stupefying."" Uri Dan; Think of Him As 'Last of the Just'; The Jerusalem Post (Israel); Nov 1, 2006."
higgledy-piggledy \hig-ul-dee-PIG-ul-dee\	"adverb In a confused, disordered, or random manner. [Of unknown origin, perhaps referring to the herding of pigs. Earliest documented use: 1598.] ""Owl feathers, apple cores, and sweet wrappers littered the floor, a number of spell books lay higgledy-piggledy among the tangled robes on his bed."" - J.K. Rowling; Harry Potter and the Half-Blood Prince; Bloomsbury; 2005."
deterge \dih-TURJ\	verb To cleanse.
tenebrous \TEN-uh-brus\	adjective 1. Shut off from the light: dark, murky. 2. Hard to understand: obscure. 3. Causing gloom. [From Old French tenebreus, from Latin tenebrosus (dark), from tenebrae (darkness). Earliest documented use: 1420.] “By its very nature rather tenebrous, undercover intelligence gathering blurs the lines between procedure and actual process, making it a difficult area to monitor and regulate.” - Sarah Vine; Radio Choice; The Times (London, UK); Sep 29, 2012.
subvention \sub-VEN-shun\	noun The provision of assistance or financial support: as a) endowment b) a subsidy from a government or foundation.
malinger \muh-LING-gur\	"verb To feign illness in order to avoid work. [From French malingre (sickly). Earliest documented use: 1820.] ""Generally, staff did not malinger. Staff earned every penny they were paid by working seriously at their jobs. They appeared to enjoy their work and looked forward to being at work."" - Azubike Uzoka; Growing Up, Growing Old; iUniverse; 2011."
eclogue \ECK-log\	"noun A pastoral poem, often in the form of a dialogue between shepherds. [From Middle English eclog, from Latin ecloga, from Greek ekloge (selection), from eklegein (to select), from ek- (ex-) + legein (to gather). Other words derived from the same root are eclectic, lexicon, and catalog. The eclogue as a specifically pastoral form first appeared in the idylls of Greek poet Theocritus.] ""The eclogue is traditionally the form of city folk who dress up in smocks to praise the simple pains and pleasures of country life, so it's surprising that a poet so well versed in rural actuality should be willing to countenance it."" - Jamie McKendrick; The Erotics of the Future; Independent on Sunday (London, UK); Apr 8, 2001. ""Because the eclogues are such a highly stylized form of poetry, they constitute a formidable challenge to any translator. The odd-numbered poems are dialogues, the even-numbered have a single speaker. Virgil's fragrant, bee-loud rural setting is placid, and at first not much seems to be happening ..."" - Robert Taylor; Virgil Puts Bite Into the Bucolic; The Boston Globe; Aug 3, 1999."
obnubilate \ahb-NOO-buh-layt\	"verb To cloud over, obscure, or darken. [From Latin obnubilare (to darken or obscure), from ob- (in the way) + nubilare (to be cloudy), from nubes (cloud). The word nuance is also a derivative of nubes.] ""It is the pity of the world, Dr Maturin, to see a man of your parts obnubilate his mind with the juice of the poppy."" - Patrick O'Brian, The Mauritius Command"
manumit \man-yuh-MIT\	verb To release from slavery.
carrefour \kair-uh-FOOR\	noun 1. Crossroads. 2. Square, plaza.
deasil \DEE-zil\	adverb Clockwise.
bludge \BLUJ\	verb, chiefly Australia & New Zealand 1. To avoid work or responsibility. 2. To get something from or live on another by imposing on hospitality or good nature: sponge.
whinge \WINJ\	verb To complain fretfully: whine.
otiose \OH-shee-ohss\	"adjective 1. Futile. 2. Idle. 3. Functionless. [From otium (leisure) + -ose (full of).] ""I hung around that summer until my presence became otiose. Friends' parents started asking me how long I would be in town."" - Ian Frazier; Out of Ohio; The New Yorker; Jan 10, 2005."
oneiric \oh-NYE-rik\	"adjective Of or relating to dreams: dreamy. [From Greek oneiros (dream). Earliest documented use: 1859] ""Fellini's films, always fantastical, soon took a distinctly oneiric turn, and he eventually filled some five hundred sheets with drawings and descriptions of his dreams."" - The Book of Dreams; The New Yorker; Sep 1, 2008."
gadzookery \gad-ZOO-kuh-ree\	noun British: The use of archaisms (as in a historical novel).
chirography \kye-RAH-gruh-fee\	"noun 1. Handwriting, penmanship. 2. Calligraphy. [We can thank the Greeks again for the combining forms chiro- (hand) and -graphy (writing). The word has many cousins: chiromancy: reading palms to divine the future: palmistry chiropractic: adjusting the spine (using hands, presumably) chiropody: an odd name for podiatry (treating foot problems) chiropter: another name for bats (who got their hands retrofitted as wings at Intelligent Design, Inc.)] ""This envelope had the air of an official record of some period long past, when clerks engrossed their stiff and formal chirography on more substantial materials than at present."" - Nathaniel Hawthorne; The Scarlet Letter; 1850."
inveterate \in-VET-uh-rut\	"adjective Firmly established; habitual. [From Middle English, from Latin inveteratus, past participle of inveterare (to grow old), in-, + vetus, stem of veter- (old). Ultimately from Indo-European root wet- (year) that is also the source of such words as veteran, veal (in the sense of yearling), and veterinary (relating to the beasts of burden, perhaps alluding to old cattle).] ""Men met each other with erected look, The steps were higher that they took; Friends to congratulate their friends made haste, And long inveterate foes saluted as they pass'd."" - John Dryden; Threnodia Augustalis; 1685."
sententious \sen-TEN-shus\	"adjective 1. Full of pithy expressions. 2. Full of pompous moralizing. [From Middle English, from Latin sententiosus (full of meaning), from sententia (opinion), from sentire (to feel or to have an opinion). Some other words derived from the same root are: sense, sentence, sentiment, sentinel, assent, consent, dissent, resent.] ""I enjoyed every glowing frame of the leisurely trip, which is punctuated by sententious epigrams. ('Lies are dreams caught red-handed,' or 'Marriage is the perfect murder of love.')"" - Joe Morgenstern; Film Review; The Wall Street Journal (New York); Aug 1, 2003. ""But 'The Reckoning,' like a great many medieval melodramas before it, a talky, sententious affair."" - A.O. Scott; Seeking Human Truths Through the Stage; The New York Times; Mar 5, 2004."
argosy \AHR-guh-see\	"noun 1. A large ship; especially: a large merchant ship. 2. A rich supply. [Shortening of Italian nave Ragusea (ship of Ragusa), after Ragusa, a maritime city on the Adriatic sea, modern day Dubrovnik, Croatia. Earliest documented use: 1577.] ""Shylock: He hath an argosy bound to Tripolis, another to the Indies."" - William Shakespeare; The Merchant of Venice; 1596. ""We get a little bit detective story, a little bit gossip, and an argosy of insight."" - Amy Wallen; Book Review: 'Nom de Plume'; Los Angeles Times; Aug 8, 2011."
eidetic \eye-DET-ik\	adjective Marked by or involving extraordinarily accurate and vivid recall especially of visual images.
piebald \PYE-bawld\	adjective 1. Of different colors; especially, spotted or blotched with black and white. 2. Composed of incongruous parts.
slake \SLAYK\	verb 1. To allay (thirst, desire, wrath, etc.) by satisfying. 2. To cool or refresh: He slaked his lips with ice. 3. To make less active, vigorous, intense, etc.: His calm manner slaked their enthusiasm.
sobriquet \SOH-brih-kay\	noun A descriptive name or epithet: nickname
lickerish \LIK-uh-rish\	"adjective 1. Lascivious; lecherous. 2. Greedy; desirous. [Middle English likerous, perhaps from Old French lecheor, lekier.] ""[H]e the lickerish snake who literally hisses at his adversaries. Their cruel games will lead them to peek through keyholes, swipe bedroom keys, purloin letters, ruin lives."" - Richard Corliss, Cinema: Lust Is a Thing with Feathers, Time, 16 Jan 1989."
"withy \WITH-ee (the TH is as in ""the"")\"	noun 1. Willow; especially: any of various willows whose pliable twigs are used for furniture and basketry. 2. A flexible slender twig or branch.
purlieu \PERL-yoo\ [purlieus plural]	"noun 1. A neighboring area. 2. A place that one frequents or has control; haunt. [In medieval England if you were fortunate enough to acquire a new piece of land, you might hold a ceremony called a ""perambulation,"" in which you would walk around and record the boundaries of your property in the presence of witnesses. If your land bordered a royal forest, there might be some confusion about where your land started and the royal forest ended. Luckily, the law said that if you performed a perambulation, you could gain at least some degree of ownership over disputed forest tracts, although your use of them would be restricted by forest laws and royals would probably still have the right to hunt on them. Such regained forest property was called a ""purlewe"" (or as it was later spelled, ""purlieu""), which derives from the Anglo-French word for ""perambulation."" From Middle English purlewe (land on the edge of a forest), from puralee, influenced by Old French lieu (place), from Anglo-French pur- (thoroughly) + aler (to go). Ultimately from the Indo-European root ambhi- (around), which is also the source of ambulance, alley, preamble, bivouac, and obambulate. Earliest documented use: 1483.] ""Dr Vince Cable remains in his post, though with this particular issue removed from his purlieu."" - Simon Heffer; Cameron Punishes Tories; The Daily Telegraph (London, UK); Dec 22, 2010."
epistemic \ep-uh-STEE-mik\	adjective Of or relating to knowledge or knowing: cognitive.
edentulous \ee-DEN-chuh-luss\	"adjective Having no teeth; toothless. [From Latin edentulus : e-, ex- + dens, dent-, tooth.] ""Mike Peart sees a staple-remover as `the essential rescue equipment to release centrefold models from their pain and discomfort.' He also mentions dentures for edentulous snakes ...."" - William Hartson, Games Creativity, Independent, 18 Nov 1997."
sciolism \SYE-uh-liz-um\	noun A superficial show of learning.
recrudescence \ree-kroo-DESS-uns\	noun A new outbreak after a period of abatement or inactivity; renewal.
eyas \EYE-us\	"noun An unfledged bird; specifically: a nestling hawk. [By erroneous splitting of the original ""a nyas"" into ""an eyas"". From Latin nidus (nest), ultimately from the Indo-European root sed- (to sit) that is also the source of sit, chair, saddle, soot, sediment, cathedral, and tetrahedron.] ""One of the three peregrine falcon chicks nesting atop downtown Seattle's Washington Mutual Bank died early Wednesday. A wildlife expert who spotted the struggling eyas freed it and then transported it to the Woodland Park Zoo."" - Marc Powell; Ailing Falcon Chick Dies in Seattle; The News Tribune (Tacoma, Washington); Jun 30, 1994."
blarney \BLAR-nee\	"noun 1. Skillful flattery: blandishment. 2. Nonsense, humbug. [After the Blarney stone, a stone in Blarney Castle in Blarney village, near Cork, Ireland which, according to legend, gives the gift of the gab to anyone who kisses it.] ""'[Ronan Keating] is really down to earth and cares about issues like cancer and poverty. Also, he really cares about his fans,' said Yang, who said she had met the singer and evidently fell for his blarney."" - Jules Quartly; Ronan Keating Shays It Bescht; Taipei Times (Taiwan); May 11, 2007."
purfle \PUR-ful\	verb To ornament the border or edges of.
oligopsony \ah-luh-GAHP-suh-nee\	"noun A market situation in which each of a few buyers exerts a disproportionate influence on the market. [From Greek oligo- (few, little) + opsonia (purchase). A word that shares the same prefix is oligarchy: government by the few, where political power is held by a small group and used for selfish and corrupt purposes.] ""Does a joint Internet venture by the world's automakers to purchase parts amount to an illegal oligopsony--a cartel of buyers that can drive prices down through their market power?"" - James V. Grimaldi; Trustbusters Put On a Stern Face; The Washington Post; Jun 29, 2000."
incarnadine \in-KAHR-nuh-dyne\	"adjective Flesh-colored; blood-red. noun An incarnadine color. verb tr. To make incarnadine. [Via French and Italian from Latin caro, (flesh). Ultimately from Indo-European root sker- (to cut) that's also the source of words such as skirt, curt, screw, shard, shears, carnage, carnivorous, carnation, sharp, and scrape.] ""They wait outside the temple, on steps incarnadine with ministerial sacrifice."" - Simon Jenkins; It's the Voters Wot Win It; The Times (London, UK); Mar 19, 1997."
fugleman \FYOO-gul-mun\	"noun One who leads a group, company, or party. [From German Flügelmann (flank man), from Flügel (wing) + Mann (man). A fugleman was once a soldier placed usually on a flank during drill to serve as a guide for his company. Earliest documented use: 1804.] ""H.L. Mencken was trying single-handedly to drag American culture out of Puritanism and into the twentieth century, to act as fugleman on this side of the Atlantic for a literary and artistic renaissance comparable to the one then taking place on the other side."" - Jonathan Yardley; The Sage of Baltimore; The Atlantic Monthly (New York); Dec 2002."
gadarene \GAD-uh-reen\	"adjective Headlong; rash. [After the town of Gadara in a biblical story where the demons in two possessed men asked Jesus to send them into a herd of swine. The demons left the men, went among the swine and all the animals rushed violently over a cliff into water.] ""Research from Greenwich Associates has identified a Gadarene rush by Japanese financial institutions into hedge funds."" - John Plender; Punting, Not Hedging; Financial Times (London, UK); Sep 27, 2004."
danegeld \DAYN-gheld\	noun (often capitalized) An annual tax believed to have been imposed originally to buy off Danish invaders in England or to maintain forces to oppose them but continued as a land tax
kvell \KVEL\	"verb To feel proud; to beam; to gloat. [From Yiddish kveln, from German quellen (to gush, to well up).] ""However, Chet landed happily at NECN, where he is admired and coddled by management who can't kvell enough about Chet."" - Monica Collins; 'Dog Days' a Sunny Walk in the Park; Boston Herald; Oct 20, 2002. ""His tone dared me not to celebrate, dared me not to kvell."" - Mimi Harrison; Das Kapital; The Washington Post; Mar 12, 2000."
misprision \mis-PRIZH-un\	noun 1. a) A neglect or wrong performance of official duty. b) Failure by one not an accessory to prevent or notify the authorities of treason or felony. 2. Misunderstanding, misinterpretation.
haptic \HAP-tik\	"adjective 1. Relating to or based on the sense of touch. 2. Characterized by a predilection for the sense of touch. [""Haptic"" (from the Greek ""haptesthai,"" meaning ""to touch"") entered English in the late 19th century as a medical synonym for ""tactile."" By the 1950s it had developed a psychological sense, describing individuals whose perception supposedly depended primarily on touch rather than sight. Although no one today divides humans into ""haptic"" and ""visual"" personalities, English retains the broadened psychological sense of ""haptic"" as well as the older ""tactile"" sense.]"
bumptious \BUMP-shus\	adjective Self-assertive in an obnoxious way. [Probably a blend of bump + fractious or a blend of bump + presumptuous. Earliest documented use: 1803.] A more prosperous, bumptious Turkey is jangling many nerves. - Is Turkey Turning Its Back on the West?; The Economist (London, UK); Oct 21, 2010.
metronome \MET-ruh-nohm\	noun An instrument designed to mark exact time by a regularly repeated tick
spavined \SPAV-ind\	"adjective 1. Affected with spavin (a horse disease or an excrescence or enlargement so formed). 2. Old and decrepit: over-the-hill. [From Middle English, from Old French espavain (swelling).] ""So, you see, we are at the bar off the lobby of the Peace Hotel in Shanghai. At the bandstand is the oldest, most spavined jazz band in existence, playing what is advertised as Dixieland. These guys are so bad they are good."" - Allan Fotheringham; One Innocent in Shanghai; Maclean's (Toronto, Canada); Oct 23, 2000. ""If they ever praise each other's bad drawings, or broken-winded novels, or spavined verses, nobody ever supposed it was from admiration; it was simply a contract between themselves and a publisher or dealer."" - Oliver Wendell Holmes; The Long Jolt on Public Opinion; The Autocrat of the Breakfast-Table; 1858."
mau-mau \MOW-mow (the “ow” is as in “cow”)\	verb 1. To intimidate (as an official) by hostile confrontation or threats. 2. To engage in mau-mauing someone.
prevenient \prih-VEEN-yunt\	"adjective Coming before; anticipatory; preventive. [From Latin praevenient-, present participle of praevenire (to precede), from pre- (before) + venire (to come).] ""[Frank Stella's] big, shield-like 'Luis Miguel Dominguin' a silver-painted shaped canvas was acquired in 1961, a prevenient time indeed to buy Stella."" - Grace Glueck; A Collection That Breathes the Spirit of Modernism; The New York Times; Apr 8, 1984."
bindle stiff \BIN-dul-stiff\	noun Hobo; especially: one who carries his clothes or bedding in a bundle
soupçon \soop-SAWNG (the final NG is not pronounced, but the vowel is nasalized)\	noun A little bit: trace.
alembic \uh-LEM-bik\	"noun 1. An apparatus formerly used in distilling substances. 2. Something that refines, purifies, or transforms. [From Middle English alambic, from Old French, from Medieval Latin alembicus, from Arabic al-anbiq, from al (the) + anbiq (still), from Greek ambix (cup).] ""Melville transforms the shaggy minutiae of life and its myriad characters (whether Hawthorne, Malcolm, a besieged wife or a shipmate) into an alembic of wishes, conflicts and disappointments that, taken together, reflect him, a mysterious, roiling, poignant writer alive, painfully alive, in every phrase he wrote."" - Brenda Wineapple, Melville at Sea, The Nation (New York), May 20, 2002."
litotes \LYE-tuh-teez\	"noun Understatement in which an affirmative is expressed by the negative of the contrary. e.g. not bad at all; this is no small problem [Greek litotes, from litos, plain.] ""In another column, I expounded the art of litotes, by which we damn with faint praise or praise with faint damns. The usual example is, `She's not a bad soprano,' which is subtly different from saying that the lady is a good soprano."" - James Kilpatrick, When Counseling Erring Writers, You Better Have Right Stuff, Denver Rocky Mountain News, Dec 28 1997."
mansuetude \MAN-swih-tood\	noun The quality or state of being gentle: meekness, tameness.
subreption \sub-REP-shun\	noun A deliberate misrepresentation; also: an inference drawn from it.
titivate \TIH-tuh-vayt\	"verb To make smarter; to spruce up; to decorate. [From earlier tidivate, perhaps from tidy + elevate. The word titillate is from Latin titillare (to tickle).] ""[Karen Kilimnik's] journey has been marked by theatricality -- such as putting small, roughly painted pictures in a Venetian palazzo titivated with flowers and feathers."" - Philippa Stockley; A Wacky Take on the 18th Century; Evening Standard (London, UK); Feb 21, 2007."
semelparous \seh-MEL-puh-rus\	adjective Reproducing or breeding only once in a lifetime.
deglutition \dee-gloo-TISH-un\	noun The act or process of swallowing.
velleity \vuh-LEE-uh-tee\	"noun Volition (i.e. will) at its faintest. [From Latin velle (to wish), ultimately from Indo-European root wel- (to wish, will) which is also the ancestor of well, will, wealth, wallop, gallop, voluptuous, and voluntary.] ""Croatia briefly mouthed velleities about inviting the Serbs to return. But last week, Croatia's President, Franjo Tudjman, expressed his true sentiments."" - Roger Cohen; Finally Torn Apart, The Balkans Can Hope; The New York Times; Sep 3, 1995."
luftmensch \LOOFT-mensh (the “OO” is as in “foot”)\	"noun An impractical dreamer. [From Yiddish, from luft (air) + mensch (man, person), from German. Earliest documented use: 1907. A luftmensch is, literally, an airman, someone with his head in the clouds. A luftmensch is unconcerned with such practical matters as earning a living. Read about a luftmensch (""Dentist and Restaurateur"") in this short story by Israel Zangwill.] ""Shavit thinks himself a hardened realist, but maybe he's another kind of luftmensch."" - Geoffrey Wheatcroft; A Romantic Dream; The Spectator (London, UK); Feb 22, 2014."
omphalos /AHM-fuh-lahss/ omphaloskepsis /om-fuh-lo-SKEP-sis/	"noun 1. The navel. 2. A central part; a focal point. [Greek.] ""Turning to my overworked, overwrought, and under-Catholicized (read Jewish) wife, I put a hand on her deflated belly, that omphalos of our little world."" - Baumann, Paul, Saint Joseph, a.k.a. Leopold Bloom; on fatherhood and hopefulness), Commonweal, 16 Dec 1994. Seamus Heaney: ""I talk about them driving past, but they cannot shake the omphalos, which is the center of belonging for the Irish person."" - Charles Guenther, Nobel Prize Poet Discusses His Irish Muse, St. Louis Post-Dispatch, 14 Oct 1998. SEE ALSO omphaloskepsis /om-fuh-lo-SKEP-sis/ [From Greek omphalos (navel) + skepsis (act of looking, examination). Ultimately from the Indo-European root spek- (to observe) which is also the ancestor of suspect, spectrum, bishop (literally, overseer), despise, espionage, telescope, spectator, and spectacles.] ""Readers whose main interest is literary how-to or criticism can look elsewhere, in places specifically dedicated to those matters. Doing too much of it here would smack of omphaloskepsis."" Stanley Schmidt; About Science Fiction; Analog Science Fiction & Fact (New York); Jun 2001. noun Contemplation of one's navel."
sericeous \suh-RISH-us\	adjective Silky.
contumely \kahn-TOO-muh-lee\	"noun Contemptuous or insulting treatment arising from arrogance. [Via French from Latin contumelia (insult), probably from con- (with) + tumere (to swell).] ""Samuel Beckett's Waiting for Godot was greeted mostly with boos, bafflement, and contumely when it was first seen in 1955."" - Robert Gore-Langton; Wating for Godot vs Legally Blonde; The Daily Telegraph (London, UK); Jan 21, 2010. ""For who would bear the whips and scorns of time, Th' oppressor's wrong, the proud man's contumely?"" - William Shakespeare; Hamlet; c. 1600."
apodictic \ap-uh-DIK-tik\	"adjective Demonstrably true. [From Latin apodicticus, from Greek apodeiktikos, from apodeiknynai (to demonstrate), from apo- + deiknynai (to show).] ""The very best philosophy is apodictic. It proceeds slowly, carefully, skeptically, via demonstration and argument, until suddenly something new comes to light."" - Peter Marin, Good Will Hunting; Existentialists and Mystics, The Los Angeles Times, Apr 12, 1998."
shank's mare \SHANKS-MAIR\	noun One's own legs.
neoteric \nee-uh-TAIR-ik\	"adjective New; recent; modern. [Late Latin neotericus, from Greek neoterikos, youthful, from neoterios, comparative of neos new.] ""Electronic books, they say, are asking them to make a mental transition -- to veer from their ingrained appreciation for the printed books that fill our nation's more than 120,000 public, academic and special interest libraries -- to depend on a neoteric gizmo that disrupts the sacred union between man and book. Welcome to the changing world of publishing."" - Charlotte Moore, Bedtime for binderies? The Austin American Statesman (Texas), Jul 28, 2000."
cliometrics \klye-uh-MET-riks\	noun plural but singular in construction The application of methods developed in other fields (as economics, statistics, and data processing) to the study of history.
pogonip \PAH-guh-nip\	noun A dense winter fog containing frozen particles that is formed in deep mountain valleys of the western United States
afflatus \uh-FLAY-tus\	noun Divinely given power or insight: inspiration.
kith \KITH\	"noun Familiar friends, neighbors, or relatives. [""Kith"" has had many meanings over the years. In its earliest uses it referred to knowledge of something, but that meaning died out in the 1400s. Another sense, ""one's native land,"" had come and gone by the early 1500s. The sense ""friends, fellow countrymen, or neighbors"" developed by the 1300s, a time when the word was also used as a synonym of ""kinsfolk."" That last sense got ""kith"" into hot water after people began using the word in the alliterative phrase ""kith and kin."" Over the years, usage commentators have complained that ""kith"" means the same thing as ""kin,"" so ""kith and kin"" is redundant. Clearly, they have overlooked some other historical definitions, but if you want to avoid redundancy charges, be sure to include friends as well as relatives among your ""kith and kin.""]"
soporific \sah-puh-RIFF-ik\	"adjective 1. Inducing or tending to induce sleep. 2. Drowsy. noun A drug or other substance that induces sleep; a hypnotic. [From Latin sopor, a deep sleep.] ""Indeed, Kapil will be judged as much by his effect on the team as his ability to stir the soporific BCCI."" - Brrijnath, Rohit, Cricket: Can Kapil Reverse the Swing, India Today, 4 Oct 1999."
Locofoco \loh-kuh-FOH-koh\	noun 1. A member of a radical group of New York Democrats organized in 1835 in opposition to the regular party organization. 2. A Democrat.
favonian \fuh-VOH-nee-un\	"adjective Of or relating to the west wind: mild [In Ode to the West Wind, poet Percy Bysshe Shelley called the ""wild West Wind"" the ""breath of Autumn's being."" But William Howard Russell's spring favonian breezes are truer to ancient Greek and Roman traditions. These held that the four winds — Favonius (or Zephyr), Notus (or Auster), Boreas (or Aquilo), and Eurus — had distinct personalities. Favonius, the west wind, was considered warm and gentle. Its Latin name, which is the basis for the English adjective ""favonian,"" derives from roots that are akin to Latin ""fovere,"" meaning ""to warm."" In Greco-Roman tradition, it was Boreas, the north wind, who was the rude and blustery type. Notus and Eurus represented the south and east winds, respectively.]"
lares and penates \LAIR-eez-end-puh-NAY-teez\	"noun 1. Household gods (the benevolent gods in an ancient Roman household). 2. Household goods (a family's treasured possessions). [From Latin Lares et Penates, from Lares, plural of Lar (in Roman mythology, the deity or spirit who protected a household) + et (and) + Penates (deities of the household that were believed to bring wealth), from penus (provisions, interior of a house). Earliest documented use: 1616.] ""But let's face it, the nearest thing that many Aussies have in the way of religion, or, as it is labelled with new-age vagueness, spirituality, are those little do-it-yourself offerings to the roadside gods, the lares and penates of the new-age pantheists."" - The Soft Toy Taking on a Religious Symbolism; The Canberra Times (Australia); Jan 14, 2006. ""The storehouse of all the shame and vulnerability in Ben's life would be locked; a private museum of curios with but one visitor, himself, to stare at the degraded and rejected lares and penates."" - Kate Fillion; The Artful Forgery of the Self; The Toronto Star (Canada); Feb 6, 1993."
anent \uh-NENT\	"preposition About, concerning. [From Middle English, from Old English on efen (on even).] ""Our experience with Mr. Estrada validates the analysis on the flaw in the Constitution anent the term of office of the Chief Executive - six years is just too short for a good president (like Fidel V. Ramos) - and too long! for a bad one like President Estrada."" - Rick B. Ramos; To Take a Stand: Disenchantment; BusinessWorld (Manila, Philippines); Apr 5, 2000. ""In the case of Citibank, the subsidiary of Citicorp, which is itself to be cocooned in Citigroup, the money trail has actually been excavated to a certain degree, anent the escapades of Raúl Salinas, a k a Mr. Ten Percent, brother of Carlos Salinas, former president of Mexico."" - Alexander Cockburn; Beat the Devil: Banks, Drugs and Marriage; The Nation (New York); May 4, 1998."
lenitive \LEN-uh-tiv\	adjective Alleviating pain or harshness: soothing.
williwaw \WILL-ih-waw\	noun 1. a) A sudden violent gust of cold land air common along mountainous coasts in near-polar latitudes, as in the Strait of Magellan, Alaska, and the Aleutian Islands. b) A sudden violent wind. 2. A violent commotion.
commove \kuh-MOOV\	verb 1. To move violently: agitate. 2. To rouse intense feeling in: excite to passion.
Maecenas \mih-SEE-nus\	"noun A generous patron especially of literature or art. [After Gaius Cilnius Maecenas, Roman statesman, friend and patron of Horace and Virgil.] ""The elected or appointed Maecenas learns to think not of art but of a line of goods known as `The Arts.'"" - Lewis H. Lapham, Performance art, Harper's Magazine, Dec 1999."
manqué \mahng-KAY (the “ng” is not pronounced, but the preceding vowel is nasalized)\	"adjective Unfulfilled (in realization of one's potential or ambition) an artist manqué; a writer manqué. [From French manqué, past participle of manquer (to lack), from Italian mancare, from manco (lacking, defective), from Latin mancus (maimed, having a crippled hand). Ultimately from Indo-European root man- (hand) that's also the source of manage, maintain, maneuver, manufacture, manuscript, and command.] ""Eddie George, governor of the Bank of England, formally opened the building and said: 'I have always seen myself as a trader manque.'"" - George Trefgarne; City: Sliding euro is an 'embarrassment'; The Daily Telegraph (London, UK); Jul 17, 1999."
fata morgana \fah-tuh-mor-GAH-nuh\	noun A mirage.
guerdon \GUR-dun\	"noun A reward or recompense. verb tr. To reward or recompense. [Via French from Latin widerdonum, alteration (by influence of Latin donum: gift) of Old High German widarlon (repayment). Earliest documented use: Before 1366.] ""The report claims Furse will also pick up a one-off payment of almost double her annual salary in 2005 -- as part of a special guerdon."" - Chris Noon; LSE Merger Talk Drive Up Value Of Furse's Holdings; Forbes (New York); Mar 20, 2006."
warison \WAIR-uh-sun\	noun A bugle call to attack.
imbricate \IM-brih-kit or -keyt\	"adjective Having overlapping edges, as tiles on a roof or scales on a fish. verb tr., intr. To overlap as roof tiles or fish scales. [From Latin imbricare (to cover with pantiles: semicylindrical tiles), from imbrex (pantile), from imber (rain).] ""In that region [Skopje], yesterday as today, allegiance to the Church was more than a merely confessional matter. It was, and is, imbricated with a series of loyalties to nation, region, and even party."" - Christopher Hitchens; The Missionary Position: Mother Teresa in Theory and Practice; Verso Books; 1995."
argentiferous \ar-jun-TIFF-uh-rus\	adjective Containing silver.
pasquinade \pass-kwuh-NAYD\	noun A satire or lampoon, especially one posted in a public place. [In Rome in 1501 a sculpture was disinterred and placed in Palazzo Orsini. The sculpture was nicknamed Pasquino, and once a year Romans posted humorous verses to the sculpture. Over time these satirical poems became named pasquinades because of the name of the statue. The statue is still in Rome with pasquinades on its base.] On the outer wall of the building, there was a vicious pasquinade of the deposed despot. - D.V. Bernard, Intimate Relations with Strangers, 2007 In the course of his career, Dosoo had written fourteen books that included political commentaries on India, a slight obloquy on New York, an autobiography, and a pasquinade of Bombay society. - Leila Hadley, Give Me the World, 2003
execrate \ek-si-KREYT\	"verb To detest, denounce, or curse. [From Latin execrari (to curse), from ex- + sacrare (to consecrate). Ultimately from the Indo-European root sak- (to sanctify), which is also the source of other words such as saint, consecrate, sacred, execrable, and sacrilegious. Earliest documented use: 1561.] ""[Edward Said was] adored or execrated with equal intensity by many millions of readers."" - The Rootless Cosmopolitan; The Nation (New York); Jul 19, 2004."
defenestration \dee-fen-uh-strey-shuhn\	noun 1. A throwing of a person or thing out of a window. 2. A usually swift dismissal or expulsion (as from a political party or office).
numeraire \noo-muh-RAIR\	noun A basic standard by which values are measured, as gold in the monetary system.
plaisance or pleasance \PLEZ-uhns\	noun 1. A place laid out as a pleasure garden or promenade. 2. Archaic: pleasure.
chapfallen \CHAP-faw-lun\	adjective 1. Having the lower jaw hanging loosely. 2. Cast down in spirit: depressed.
deliquesce \del-i-KWES\	verb 1. To become liquid by absorbing moisture from the air, as certain salts. 2. To melt away.
adscititious \ad-si-TISH-uhs\	adjective Derived from outside; external; additional. [From Latin adscitus, past participle of adsciscere (to admit or adopt), from ad- (toward) + sciscere (to seek to know), from scire (to know). Ultimately from the Indo-European root skei- (to cut or split) that also gave us schism, ski, and shin.] Dr. Kozak stands in the middle of the adscititious atmosphere and soaks in the effect - Joel Wedel; Siphonophora; iUniverse; 2006 These were significant appendages, to be sure; not altogether adscititious. - Ameen Rihani, The Book of Khalid, 2012 His delineations of character and action, if executed with ability, will have a raciness and freshness about them, which will attest their fidelity, the secret charm, which belongs to truth and nature, and with which even the finest genius cannot invest a system, of adscititious and imaginary manners. - Catharine Maria Sedgwick, Clarence, 2011
imprecate \IM-pri-kayt\	"verb tr. To invoke evil upon; curse. [Latin imprecari, imprecat- : in-, towards + precari, to pray, ask.] ""Bear witness, gods, you heard him bid me go; You, whom he mocked with imprecating vows Of promised faith! - I'll die; I will not bear it."""
mantic \MAN-tik\	"adjective Of or relating to divination. [From Greek mantikos, from mantis (prophet), from mainesthai (to rage). Ultimately from Indo-European root men- (to think) that is also the source of words such as mind, mental, mention, Sanskrit mantra, automatic, mania, money, praying mantis, monument, music, and amnesia.] ""During July, you will be involved with people who are studying the mantic arts, including astrology."" - Sydney Omarr; Today's Horoscope; The Washington Post; Jun 21, 2002. ""Pan had taught him for summoning what beast he wished, and filled the outdoor theatre with loud leaping green lumps of slime. Comic beyond words, the piece was a hit - not least for frog-happy Eurydice. Whether anyone suspected the mantic origins of this so-called coincidence ..."" - Kurt Leland; The Adolescence of Orpheus; 2001"
reticence \RET-uh-suhnt\	adjective 1. Disposed to be silent or not to speak freely; reserved. 2. Reluctant or restrained.
excursive \ik-SKUR-siv\	"adjective Tending to wander off; rambling. [From Latin excurrere (to run out), from ex- (out) + currere (to run). Ultimately from the Indo-European root kers- (to run) that's also the source of car, career, carpenter, occur, discharge, and caricature. Why caricature? Because a caricature is a loaded or distorted picture of someone.] ""Through a succession of journeys shaped by the caprices of the bus companies, he conjures a narrative that is excursive, digressive and diverting beyond measure."" - Man on an Omnibus; The Daily Telegraph (London, UK); Dec 3, 2006."
factotum \fak-TOH-tuhm\	"noun A servant or a low-level employee tasked with many things. [From Latin factotum, from facere (to do) + totus (all). Earliest documented use: 1573.] ""Now, a reporter trying to interview a business source is confronted by a phalanx of factotums."" - David Carr; The Puppetry of Quotation Approval; The New York Times; Sep 16, 2012."
lurid \LOOR-id\	adjective 1. Gruesome; horrible; revolting: the lurid details of an accident. 2. Glaringly vivid or sensational; shocking: the lurid tales of pulp magazines. 3. Terrible in intensity, fierce passion, or unrestraint: lurid crimes. 4. Lighted or shining with an unnatural, fiery glow; wildly or garishly red: a lurid sunset. 5. Wan, pallid, or ghastly in hue; livid.
equinoctial \ee-kwuh-NOK-shuhl\	adjective 1. Pertaining to an equinox or the equinoxes, or to the equality of day and night. 2. Pertaining to the celestial equator. 3. Occurring at or about the time of an equinox. 4. Botany. (of a flower) opening regularly at a certain hour.
plinth \plinth\	noun Architecture 1. A slablike member beneath the base of a column or pier. 2. A square base or a lower block, as of a pedestal.
excelsior \ik-SEL-see-er\	"noun Slender, curved wood shavings used especially for packing. adjective [Latin] Ever upward: motto of New York State. [From a trademark. From Latin, literally higher, from excelsus, high.] ""In a glint of needle light, of grass seeds, dew flecks, a friend is throwing her voice While far inside a grainy heaven a butcher's apron ripples its dried blood in the wind. The bark strippings, excelsior, the panicles of the garden. In the midst of summer a friend cuts greens and places them in a bowl as if they were fronds. A friend is a vinegar - and now, pearl-shaped, in clusters, faces among her face, As globes rise on the lawn, each above a root of recriminations."" - Garden solstice; The Antioch Review; Jun 1, 1996. The word excelsior is also the motto of the New York state. It is also the title of a poem by Henry Wadsworth Longfellow. Of course, here they are not exhorting us to take inspiration from wood shavings. Rather these refer to the Latin sense of the word."
sylvan \SIL-vuhn\	"adjective 1. Of, pertaining to, or inhabiting the woods. 2. Consisting of or abounding in woods or trees; wooded; woody: a shady, sylvan glade. 3. Made of trees, branches, boughs, etc. noun 4. A person dwelling in a woodland region. 5. A mythical deity or spirit of the woods. [In Latin, ""sylva"" means ""wood"" or ""forest,"" and the related ""Sylvanus"" names the Roman god of the woods and fields -- a god sometimes identified with the Greek god Pan. These words gave rise to English ""sylvan"" in the 16th century. The English word was first used as a noun meaning ""a mythological deity of the woods,"" eventually taking on the broader meaning ""one who frequents the woods."" The adjective ""sylvan"" followed soon after the noun and is now the more common word. Some other offspring of ""sylva"" (which can also be spelled ""silva"") include ""silviculture"" (""a branch of forestry dealing with the development and care of forests""), ""sylvatic"" (a synonym of ""sylvan"" that can also mean ""occurring in or affecting wild animals""), and the first name ""Sylvia.""]"
victual \VIT-l\ (also, vittle)	noun 1. Victuals, food supplies; provisions. 2. Food or provisions for human beings. transitive verb 3. To supply with victuals. intransitive verb 4. To take or obtain victuals.
nihilarian \nih-i-LAR-ee-uhn\	"noun One who does useless work. [From Latin nihil (nothing).] ""You may find yourself worrying that you're turning into a nihilarian."" - Sian Prior; Ineffable; The Age (Melbourne, Australia); Dec 16, 2002."
acnestis \ak-NEES-tis\	"noun The part of the body where one cannot reach to scratch. [From Greek aknestis (spine)] ""In what has to be the longest post-election season in living memory, the last five months have felt like an acnestis upon our collective soul; like that little patch of skin on our backs that we just can't reach to scratch ourselves. It's irritating. It's annoying. It's left us reaching and spinning around in circles."" - A Wish List to Soothe Our Collective Itch; New Straits Times (Malaysia); Aug 5, 2008."
gimcrack \JIM-krak\	"noun Something cheap and showy, of little use. adjective Showy, but worthless. [""Gimcrack"" is only one of many peculiar-sounding words that have pervaded our language to refer to something ornamental and of little value. Others include ""bauble,"" ""trinket,"" ""knickknack,"" ""gewgaw,"" ""kickshaw"" and ""tchotchke."" ""Bauble"" appears to be the oldest among the group, with usage dating back to the 14th century. ""Gewgaw"" and ""kickshaw"" first appeared in the 16th century, whereas ""gimcrack"" and ""knickknack"" established themselves in the 17th century. ""Tchotchke,"" borrowed from the Yiddish, is by far the most recent addition to our language, only first appearing as an English word in the 1970s.] ""Uncle Rabid Prophet TechEye has worshiped more gimcrack bits of junk and practiced more half-baked religions than all of Hollywood combined."" - Bow Down And Open Your Wallet; Warsaw Business Journal (Poland); Aug 21, 2006."
lentiginous \len-TIJ-uh-nuhs\	"adjective Covered with freckles. [From Latin lentiginosus (freckled), from lentigo (freckle), from lens (lentil).] ""I realised that my freckly Celtic complexion wasn't a curse I had to endure for life, and my offensively lentiginous skin could be smoothed into picture-perfect ivory."" - Simon Price; Cover-up, Powder and Eyeliner; The Guardian (London, UK); Dec 14, 2002."
Nimrod \NIM-rahd\	noun 1. A descendant of Ham represented in Genesis as a mighty hunter who is sometimes associated with the Tower of Babel. 2. Not capitalized: hunter 3. Not capitalized, slang: idiot, jerk [In the Bible, Nimrod was a hunter and Noah’s great-grandson. It’s not clear how the sense of the word transferred from a hunter to a stupid person, but the new sense was popularized in the Bugs Bunny cartoons when Bugs Bunny called rabbit-hunting Elmer Fudd as “Poor little Nimrod”. Earliest documented use for sense 1: 1933, for sense 2: 1623. Even earlier, the first recorded use in English is from 1548, in a now-obsolete sense as a tyrant.] “What kind of a nimrod makes kids the responsible party in a dim-witted ideology on poverty and neglect?” - Martin Hackworth; Ignoramus, of the Bloviating Type; Idaho State Journal (Pocatello); Feb 3, 2013. “The big-ticket item at their giant auction was a nimrod package to go hunting.” - Dick Harmon; Hunt Nets Dough for Y; Deseret News (Salt Lake City, Utah); Jun 12, 2004.
extirpate \EK-ster-peyt, ik-STUR-peyt\	"transitive verb 1. To destroy completely. 2. To pull up by the roots. [From Latin extirpare (to root out), from stirps (stem, root).] ""Shut up, shut up, shut up. Disloyal thoughts must be ruthlessly extirpated."" - Gene Kerrigan; Screw Democracy, Here's Dear Leader; Irish Independent (Dublin, Ireland); Apr 13, 2008."
denouement \dey-noo-MAHN\	"noun The final resolution of the plot of a story or a complex sequence of events. [From French dénouement (outcome or conclusion; literally, untying), from dénouer (to unknot or undo), from de- (from) + nouer (to tie), from Latin nodus (knot). Ultimately from the Indo-European root ned- (to bind), which is also the source of node, noose, annex, connect, ouch, and nettle. Earliest documented use: 1752.] ""But in Japan's narrative, the denouement is elusive. This disaster story keeps building, growing worse."" - Japan's Crucible; Chicago Tribune (Illinois); Mar 15, 2011."
histrionic \his-tree-ON-ik\	"adjective 1. Of or pertaining to actors, acting, or theater. 2. Overly dramatic or affected. [From Late Latin histrionicus, from Latin histrion-, histrio (actor).] ""The playwright's intent together with his moral input ignored, a drama of great depth is trivialized. An unbearably boring, histrionic horror takes its place."" - Naomi Doudai, Histrionic Horror, The Jerusalem Post, Sep 7, 1999 ""Eventually, Dickens fused his talents in the public readings from his own novels, which dominated his last years, in the course of which he astounded huge crowds on both sides of the Atlantic with his histrionic genius."" - Simon Callow, To Be a Shape-Shifting Cast of One, The New York Times, Apr 21, 2002."
moue \moo\ plural moues	"noun Pout; grimace. [From French moue (pout), from Middle French moe.] ""You can almost see the helpless little shrug of the shoulders that accompanies it and the moue of that perfectly lipsticked mouth."" - Allison Pearson; How to Eat For Petite; The Sydney Morning Herald (Australia); Jan 15, 2005."
depredate \DEP-ruh-dayt\	"verb 1. To lay waste: plunder, ravage. 2. To engage in plunder. [""Depredate"" derives primarily from the Latin verb ""praedari,"" meaning ""to plunder,"" an ancestor to our words ""predator"" and ""prey."" First appearing in English in the 17th century, the word most commonly appears in contexts relating to nature and ecology, where it is often used to describe the methodical, almost automatic destruction of life. That's how the film critic Stanley Kauffman, for example, summarized the plot of the famous horror movie Jaws (1975): ""A killer shark depredates the beach of an island summer resort. Several people are killed. Finally, the shark is killed. That's the story.""]"
anomie or anomy \AN-uh-mee\	"noun Social instability and alienation caused by the erosion of norms and values. [From French anomie, from Greek anomia (lawlessness), from anomos (lawless), from a- (without) + nomos (law). Ultimately from the Indo-European root nem- (to assign or take) that's also the source for words such as number, numb, nomad, metronome, astronomy, and nemesis.] ""That didn't mean the music was emotionless, but that the emotions were bleak: isolation, urban anomie, feeling cold and hollow inside, paranoia."" - Simon Reynolds; One Nation Under A Moog; The Guardian (London, UK); Oct 10, 2009."
bereft	verb Past participle of bereaved (greatly saddened at being deprived by death of a loved one). adjective Deprived. They are bereft of their senses. He is bereft of all happiness.
anathema \uh-NATH-uh-muh\	noun, plural -mas. 1. A person or thing detested or loathed: That subject is anathema to him. 2. A person or thing accursed or consigned to damnation or destruction. 3. A formal ecclesiastical curse involving excommunication. 4. Any imprecation of divine punishment. 5. A curse; execration.
predilection \pred-l-EK-shuhn\	noun An established preference for something: a predilection for Bach.
Sturm und Drang \shtoorm-unt-DRAHNG\	"noun Turmoil. [""Sturm und Drang"" comes from German, where it literally means ""storm and stress."" Although it's now a generic synonym of ""turmoil,"" the term was originally used in English to identify a late 18th-century German literary movement whose works were filled with rousing action and high emotionalism, and often dealt with an individual rebelling against the injustices of society. The movement took its name from the 1776 play Sturm und Drang, a work by one of its proponents, dramatist and novelist Friedrich von Klinger. Although the literary movement was well known in Germany in the late 1700s, the term ""Sturm und Drang"" didn't appear in English prose until the mid-1800s.] ""After the sturm und drang of Revolutionary Road, director Sam Mendes opted for a looser, lighter story."" - Colin Covert; Pregnant Pause With 'Away We Go'; Star Tribune (Minneapolis, Minnesota); Jun 12, 2009."
lese majesty \leez MAJ-uh-stee\	"noun 1. An offense against a sovereign power. 2. An attack against someone's dignity or against a custom or institution held sacred. [From French lèse-majesté, from Latin crimen laesae maiestatis (the crime of injured majesty).] ""There was, though, one small sign of disenchantment. In a field well away from the airport, there was a scarecrow, dressed in the usual tatters, except for a pair of All Blacks tracksuit bottoms. Such lese majesty would have been unthinkable before the World Cup."" - New Zealand: Natural Born Thriller; The Guardian (London, UK); Feb 5, 2000."
prude \prood\	noun A person who is overly concerned with propriety or decorum. ETYMOLOGY: From Old French prudefemme (wise or good woman), feminine of prud'homme (wise man). The word prude once had positive connotations, but nowadays it is used only in a negative sense.
futtock \FUHT-uhk\	noun One of the curved timbers that forms a rib in the frame of a ship.
horologe \HAWR-uh-lohj\	noun A device, such as a clock or sundial, used in telling time.
canaille \kuh-NYE\	"noun The common people; the masses; riffraff. [From French canaille (villain, rabble), from Italian canaglia (pack of dogs, rabble), from cane (dog), from Latin canis (dog). Ultimately from the Indo-European root kwon- (dog), which is also the source of canine, chenille (from French chenille: caterpillar, literally, little dog), kennel, canary, hound, dachshund, corgi, cynic, and cynosure. Earliest documented use: 1676.] ""The gang in the alley was not canaille; fine gentlemen from the court were raging here."" - Isak Dinesen; Last Tales; Random House; 1957."
paramour \PAH-uh-moor\	noun A lover, especially one in an adulterous relationship.
syllepsis \si-LEP-sis\	"noun Grammar. A construction in which a word governs two or more other words but agrees in number, gender, or case with only one, or has a different meaning when applied to each of the words, as in He lost his coat and his temper. [Charles Dickens was apparently a big fan of syllepses — his ""She went home in a flood of tears and a sedan chair"" is another example of one. Sentences like these are humorously incongruous, but they're not grammatically incorrect. ""Syllepsis"" has another meaning, however — illustrated by such sentences as ""My sisters, and particularly my youngest sister, feel strongly about the matter"" — and in this sense it is something to be avoided. The ""sisters"" sentence has a problem; it has two subjects, and only one of them agrees with the verb ""feel."" The word ""syllepsis"" derives from the Greek ""syllēpsis,"" and ultimately from ""syllambanein,"" meaning ""to gather together."" It has been used in English since at least 1550.] ""'Crossing', first of all, is an instance of syllepsis, a figure in which one word is a pun for two different senses. Not only is the `Visionary' (the character in the essay, as distinguished from the historical Emerson) literally moving from one place to another, but he is also at a crossroads, a crux. Cross, deriving from the Latin crux, means not only a physical cross, but a fateful juncture."" - Eric Wilson; ""Terrible simplicity"": Emerson's Metaleptic Style; Style; Spring 1997."
diathesis \dahy-ATH-uh-sis\	noun Pathology. A constitutional predisposition or tendency, as to a particular disease or affection.
nubbin \NUHB-in\	noun 1. A small lump or stunted piece; stub. 2. A small or imperfect ear of corn. 3. An undeveloped fruit.
dyadic \dahy-AD-ik\	adjective 1. Twofold. 2. Of or relating to a dyad.
valence \VAY-luhns\	noun 1. The capacity of something to unite, react, or interact with something else. 2. Psychology. The degree of attraction or aversion that an individual feels toward a specific object or event.
sibilant \SIB-uh-luhnt\	adjective A hissing sound like that of (s) or (sh)
beatific \bee-uh-TIFF-ik\	adjective 1. Of, possessing, or imparting a state of utmost bliss. 2. Having a blissful appearance.
probity \PROH-bi-tee\	noun Integrity and uprightness; honesty.
desultory \DES-uhl-tawr-ee\	"adjective 1. Marked by absence of a plan; disconnected; jumping from one thing to another. 2. Digressing from the main subject; random. [The Latin adjective ""desultorius,"" the parent of ""desultory,"" was used by the ancients to refer to a circus performer (called a ""desultor"") whose trick was to leap from horse to horse without stopping. It makes sense, therefore, that someone or something ""desultory"" jumps from one thing to another. (""Desultor"" and ""desultorius"" are derived from the Latin verb ""salire,"" which means ""to leap."") A desultory conversation leaps from one topic to another, and doesn't have a distinct point or direction. A desultory student skips from one subject to another without applying serious effort to any one. A desultory comment is a digressive one that jumps away from the topic at hand. And a desultory performance is one resulting from an implied lack of steady, focused effort. Other words derived from the same Latin root, salire, are sally, somersault, insult, result, saute, salient, and saltant. Earliest documented use: 1581.] ""Anyway, here we are with our little burgers and cokes, making the sort of desultory conversation that those who have been married 30 years make -- when this newly married couple walk in."" - Bikram Vohra; Love is the Last Bite; Khaleej Times (Dubai, United Arab Emirates); Apr 16, 2011."
satyriasis \sey-tuh-RAHY-uh-sis\ a.k.a. Don Juanism	noun Psychiatry. A syndrome, occurring in males, of excessive preoccupation with sexual gratification or conquest and leading to persistently transient and sometimes exploitative relationships.
apostasy \uh-POS-tuh-see\	noun A total desertion of or departure from one's religion, principles, party, cause, etc.
numinous \NOO-muh-nuhs\	"adjective Supernatural, mysterious, or awe-inspiring. [From Latin numen (nod of the head, command, divine will). Earliest documented use: 1647.] ""Rol and Noey's lives unfold in an atmosphere of mildly magical realism: a numinous shimmer at the edges of the everyday."" - Geordie Williamson; Unsettled by Pain; The Australian (Sydney); Dec 3, 2011."
mountebank \MOUN-tuh-bangk\	"noun 1. A person who sells quack medicines, as from a platform in public places, attracting and influencing an audience by tricks, storytelling. 2. Any charlatan or quack. [""Mountebank"" derives from the Italian ""montimbanco,"" which was formed by combining the verb ""montare"" (""to mount""), the preposition ""in"" (converted to ""im,"" meaning ""in"" or ""on"") and the noun ""banco"" (""bench""). Put these components together and you can deduce the literal origins of ""mountebank"" as someone mounted on a bench — the ""bench"" being the platform on which charlatans from the 16th and 17th centuries would stand to sell their phony medicines. Mountebanks often included various forms of light entertainment on stage in order to attract customers. Later, extended uses of ""mountebank"" referred to someone who falsely claims to have knowledge about a particular subject or a person who simply pretends to be something he or she is not in order to gain attention.] ""Billy Graham is now at death's door, and I shudder at the fulsome eulogies and encomiums that will be heaped on him upon his demise. Fortunately, Bothwell's book [The Prince of War] can provide a salutary antidote to them. It's the only fitting memorial for Graham and stands as a stark warning to posterity to be on guard against similar charlatans, mountebanks, and demagogues, especially in the fertile field of religion. Bothwell's book should be required reading for all Americans."" - Richard A. S. Hall; Evangelist Unmasked; Free Inquiry (Amherst, New York); Aug/Sep 2011."
embouchure \ahm-boo-SHOOR\	noun 1. The mouth of a river. 2. Music a) The mouthpiece of a woodwind or brass instrument. b) The manner in which the lips and tongue are applied to such a mouthpiece.
Munchausen Syndrome	noun A psychological disorder characterized by the feigning of the symptoms of a disease or injury in order to undergo diagnostic tests, hospitalization, or medical or surgical treatment.
cothurnal \koh-THUR-nuhl\	"adjective Of or related to tragedy or tragic acting. [From Latin, from Greek kothornos (a thick-soled laced boot worn by tragic actors in ancient Athenian tragedies).] ""The first thing that strikes the listeners is the grotesque and parodic transformation of the habitual musical idioms, ... devoid of any shade of elevation and enthusiasm inherent in oratorical declarations, as if an imaginary hero, invisibly assuming a cothurnal pose, is just going to make faces and put out his tongue at the public."" - V. Tsenova; Underground Music from the Former USSR; Routledge; 1998."
foal \fohl\	noun A young horse, mule, or related animal, esp. one that is not yet one year of age.
puerile \PYUR-ul\	"adjective 1. Immature; silly; childish. 2. Relating to childhood. From Latin puer (boy). Ultimately from the Indo-European root pau- (few, little), which is also the source of paucity, few, foal, filly, pony, pullet, poultry, pupa, poor, pauper, poco, and Sanskrit putra (son).] ""An Australian friend recently jolted me with an apparently aesthetic but obviously puerile suggestion, 'Mate, can we amend this burqa ban so that only ugly women are required to wear them while the good-looking ones are mandated to wear bikinis?' He was referring to the boiling controversy in Europe over the body-covering burqa."" - Chan Akya; Burqa Over the Bastille; Asia Times (Hong Kong); Jul 24, 2010."
virago \vi-RAH-goh, -rey-\	noun 1. A loud-voiced, ill-tempered, scolding woman; shrew. 2. Archaic. A woman of strength or spirit.
termagant \TUR-muh-guhnt\	"noun A quarrelsome or overbearing woman. [From Old French Tervagant. The word comes from the name of an imaginary deity that Christians in medieval Europe erroneously believed was worshiped by Muslims. It was represented in morality plays as a violent, overbearing personage. Over time the term became generalized to apply to any brawling person, and eventually only to women.] ""[Mrs. Lincoln], the wife of one of our most beloved presidents, has been characterized as a sharp-tongued termagant who made her husband's life miserable."" - Larry Eskridge; The Tragedy of Mary Lincoln; The Daily Ledger (Canton, Illinois); May 16, 2009."
harridan \HAHR-i-dn\	noun A scolding, vicious woman; hag; shrew.
buskin \BUS-kin\	"noun 1. A thick-soled laced boot, reaching to the knee or calf, worn by actors of ancient Greek tragedies. Also known as cothurnus. 2. A tragic drama. [Perhaps from Middle French brousequin. A thick-soled boot was a distinctive feature of a tragic actor in ancient Greece. It elevated him and raised his stature. Because those big shoes were often worn by tragedians, we came to refer to a tragedy itself as a buskin. A counterpart of buskin is sock (a comedy) after soccus, a lightweight low shoe worn by comic actors.] ""'My vein,' wrote Corneille, 'often combines the lofty buskin with the comic sock, and ... pleases the audience by striking contrasting notes.'"" - Linda Winer; Corneille With Kushner's Help; Newsday (New York); Jan 20, 1994."
atomy \AT-uh-mee\	"noun A skeleton. [From the word anatomy taken as ""an atomy"". From Latin anatomia, from Greek ana- (up) + tomia (a cutting). Ultimately from the Indo-European root tem- (to cut) that is alto the source of tonsure, temple, epitome, and contemplate.] ""That eyes, that are the frail'st and softest things, Who shut their coward gates on atomies, Should be call'd tyrants, butchers, murderers!"" - William Shakespeare; As You Like It; 1599."
priapean \prie-uh-PEE-uhn\	"adjective (see also priapric) 1. Phallic. 2. Relating to or overly concerned with masculinity. [From Priapus, the god of procreation, guardian of gardens and vineyards, and personification of the erect phallus in Greek and Roman mythologies.] ""Possibly the dirtiest American-made motion picture that has ever been legally exhibited, with Priapean detail that might well have embarrassed Boccaccio."" - John Lyttle, Controversy is a trick of the trade, (quoting Time magazine's review of the movie Baby Doll) Independent, 8 Jun 1996."
hadal \HAYD-l\	"adjective Of or relating to the deepest regions of the ocean, below about 6,000 meters (20,000 feet). [French, from Hades, from Greek Haides, the god of the netherworld and dispenser of earthly riches, his netherworld kingdom, the abode of the shades of the dead.] ""The bottoms beneath the high seas at depths of about 6,000 to 18,000 feet (1,800-5,500 meters) are referred to as the abyssal region. These regions are characterized by a temperature that seldom exceeds 4 deg. C. A second term, the hadal region, is used in connection with the still-deeper waters of the oceanic trenches."" - Jack Pearce, Marine Biology, Colliers Encyclopedia CD-ROM, 28 Feb 1996."
stick-in-the-mud	One who lacks initiative, imagination, or enthusiasm.
benthos \BEN-thos\	"noun 1. The collection of organisms living on or in sea or lake bottoms. 2. The bottom of a sea or a lake. [Greek.] ""The `Exploration' section begins with efforts simply to locate the ocean floor, including the British Royal Navy's successfully using a weighted line to sound the benthos between Norway and Iceland at 4,098 feet ..."" - Daniel Duane, 20,000 Leagues Under the Sea; Deep Atlantic (book review) Los Angeles Times, 5 Jan 1997."
firth \furth\	noun Scots. A long, narrow inlet of the sea.
thalassic \thuh-LAS-ik\	"adjective Of or relating to seas or oceans, especially smaller or inland seas. [French thalassique, from Greek thalassa, sea.] ""Coastal spas pump in sea water for thalassic therapy - Greek for `sea treatment.'"" - The Luxury of Spas, Business Daily, 13 Apr 1998."
bathypelagic \bath-uh-puh-LAJ-ik\	"adjective Of, relating to, or living in the depths of the ocean, especially between about 600 and 3,000 meters (2,000 and 10,000 feet). [Bathy- deep + Greek pelagikos, sea.] ""Below this region are the bathypelagic fishes, with small eyes and luminescent organs ..."" - Leonard P. Schultz, Fish, Colliers Encyclopedia CD-ROM, 28 Feb 1996."
venial \VEE-nee-uhl\	"adjective Easily excused; not seriously wrong, as a sin (opposed to mortal). [From Latin venia (forgiveness). Ultimately from the Indo-European root wen- (to desire or to strive for), which is also the source of wish, win, ween, overweening, venerate, venison, Venus, and banyan. Earliest documented use: before 1300.] ""Wealthy fraudsters are given chieftaincy titles and venerated, and their nefarious deeds are euphemistically tagged venial."" - Chiedu Uche Okoye; Victims of Illusion; Daily Independent (Nigeria); Jun 27, 2011. ""The production takes a few venial liberties with the text."" - Ben Brantley; Railing at a Money-Mad World; The New York Times; Jul 1, 2010."
brougham \broom, BROO-uhm, broam, BROA-uhm\	noun 1. A closed four-wheeled carriage with an open driver's seat in front. 2. An automobile with an open driver's seat. 3. An electrically powered automobile resembling a coupe.
syzygy \SIZ-uh-jee\	noun 1. Astronomy. The configuration of the sun, the moon, and Earth (or any three celestial bodies) lying in a straight line. 2. Any two related things, either alike or opposite. [Late Latin syzygia, from Greek suzugia, union, from suzugos, paired : sun-, syn- + zugon, yoke.]
verisimilitude \ver-uh-si-MIL-i-tood, -tyood\	"noun 1. The quality of appearing to be true or real. 2. Something that has the appearance of being true or real. [From Latin verisimilitudo, from verum (truth) + similis (like). Earliest documented use: 1603.] ""There are moments in the new musical The Burnt Part Boys that mirror recent events with haunting verisimilitude."" - David Rooney; Fictional Mining Town; The New York Times; May 19, 2010."
tetchy also techy \TECH-ee\	adjective Peevish; testy.
crapehanger \KRAYP-hang-guhr\	"noun A gloomy person; a pessimist. [A crapehanger was one who hung up black bands of crape as a symbol of mourning. The word is from English crepe/crape, from French crepe, from Latin crispus (curled or wrinkled). Earliest documented use: 1921.] ""'I don't mean to sound like a crapehanger, because I am an optimist by nature,' said Thomas Emmel."" - William Mullen; Scientists Try for Butterfly Breakthrough; Chicago Tribune; Sep 3, 2002."
losel \LOA-zuhl, LOO-, LOZ-uhl\	noun One that is worthless. [Middle English, from losen, past participle of lesen, to lose, from Old English -leosan.]
meshuga or meshugga \muh-SHOOG-uh\	"adjective Crazy; stupid. [Meshuggener"" comes from the Yiddish ""meshugener,"" which in turn derives from ""meshuge,"" an adjective that is synonymous with ""crazy"" or ""foolish."" English speakers have used the adjective form, ""meshuga"" or ""meshugge,"" to mean ""foolish"" since the late 1800s; we've dubbed foolish folk ""meshuggeners"" since at least 1900.] ""Plenty of hip-hoppers want to be considered insane, but only Paul Barman wants to be known as meshuga."""
nebbish \NEB-ish\	"noun A timid, meek, or ineffectual person. [Yiddish nebekh, poor, unfortunate, of Slavic origin.] ""Jay Baruchel plays the hero -- a security officer at the Pittsburgh airport -- as such a tongue-tied, head-ducking nebbish that it's inconceivable that he would end up with the gorgeous, smart, kind, hockey-loving woman played by Alice Eve."" - Mike Hale; Playing the Odds of Love; The New York Times; Mar 12, 2010."
epigone \EP-i-goan\	"noun A mediocre imitator or follower of an important artist, writer, etc. [From French epigone, from Greek epigonoi (child), from epi- (after) + gonos, from root of gignesthai (to be born).] ""Just as Michael Arad doesn't want to be pigeonholed as an 'Israeli architect', he is loath to appear an epigone of Maya Lin, the designer of the Vietnam Veterans Memorial in Washington, D.C."" - Michael Z. Wise; At Ground Zero, A Fresh Take; The Los Angeles Times; Mar 7, 2004."
endogamy \en-DOG-uh-mee\	"noun The practice of marriage within a specific social group. [From endo- (within), from Greek endon (within) + -gamy (marriage), from Greek gamos (marriage).] ""A third of Americans have become religiously mobile -- ascribing not to their original faith. This social interweaving has bred forbearance to the point that religious endogamy has become irrelevant."" - Meidyatama Suryodiningrat; Pride, Prejudice & Hussein in U.S. Election; The Jakarta Post (Indonesia); Mar 8, 2008."
aphelion \uh-FEE-lee-uhn, uh-FEEL-yuhn\	"noun The point on the orbit of a celestial body that is farthest from the sun. [From New Latin aphelium : Greek apo-, apo- + Greek helios, sun.] ""Oddly enough, Earth is fading away from the sun in its orbit, reaching aphelion, its most remote distance, on July 3."" - News flash: These bolts more than hot air, Star Tribune, 19 Jun 1995."
welkin \WEL-kin\	"noun The sky or heaven. [From Old English wolcen (cloud).] ""The MPs made the welkin, or at least the chamber, shake with mockery."" - Simon Hoggart; Master of the Euro Flimflam Mountain; The Guardian (London, UK); Jun 26, 2007."
aesthete or esthete \ES-theet\	"noun 1. Someone who has or affects high sensitivity to beauty, especially in art. 2. One whose pursuit and admiration of beauty is regarded as excessive or affected. [Back-formation from aesthetic. Via Latin from Greek aisthesis (sensation or perception). Ultimately from the Indo-European root au- (to perceive) which is the source of other words such as audio, audience, audit, obey, oyez, auditorium, anesthesia, aesthetic, and synesthesia. Earliest recorded use 1881. This modern back-formation grows out of the equally modern notion that ""art"" is ruled by feelings (Greek ""aisthesis""). As Ananda Coomaraswamy points out, however, the ability to feel is a trait we share with all other animals; we are more likely to become human by thinking about what we feel. Art, from this perspective, is not an object, but a method by which (traditionally, at least) we clarify and share ideas and truths. An ""aesthetic"", on the other hand, is merely a reaction, rather than a value or a standard by which to judge what is ""art"" and what is not. Coomaraswamy, who was curator at the Boston MFA, said ""A real art is one of symbolic and significant representation; a representation of things that cannot be seen except by the intellect."" And ""the appeal of beauty is not to the senses, but through the senses, to the intellect.""] ""Alex is a secret aesthete, a slum-dwelling intellectual who finds redemption through Beethoven rather than the pumping dance beats down at the Korova milk bar."""
allogeneic \al-uh-je-NEE-ik\ also allogenic \-JEN-ik\	"adjective Being genetically different although belonging to or obtained from the same species: allogeneic tissue grafts. [Allo- + Greek genea, race + -ic.] ""Some have autologous transplants, in which their own marrow is harvested and returned to them later; others must search for allogeneic transplants from donors--usually relatives."" - Denise Grady, Beyond the Call by Giving Her Bone Marrow to a Stranger, an Illinois Mother Went, Time, 1 Oct 1997."
meiosis \my-O-sis\	"noun 1. Genetics. The process of cell division in sexually reproducing organisms that reduces the number of chromosomes in reproductive cells, leading to the production of gametes in animals and spores in plants. 2. Rhetorical understatement. [From Greek meiosis (lessening), from meioun (to lessen), from meion (less). Meiosis is a figure of speech in which underemphasis is used to achieve a greater effect, for example, ""It took a few days to build the Great Wall of China."" Also see litotes. Greek meiosis, diminution, from meioun, to diminish, from meion, less.] ""At times I have a problem with this understatement. Understatement is effective only when there is real purpose to the meiosis."" - James Gardner; Cold Mountain; National Review (New York); Dec 31, 1997. ""I took two years of biology in secondary school and couldn't today tell you the difference between meiosis and mitosis without a little help from Google, yet no one's arguing that studying cellular processes is a waste of precious school resources."" - Kate Sommers-Dawes; Foreign Language in High Schools is Worthwhile; Washington Post; May 13, 2010."
zugzwang \TSOOK-tsvahng\	noun A position where one is forced to make an undesirable move. [From German Zugzwang, Zug (move) + Zwang (compulsion, obligation).]
suborn \suh-BORN\	"verb 1. To induce secretly to do an unlawful thing 2. To induce to commit perjury; also: to obtain (perjured testimony) from a witness. [The Latin word that gave us ""suborn"" in the early part of the 16th century is ""subornare,"" which translates literally as ""to secretly furnish or equip."" The ""sub-"" that brings the ""secretly"" meaning to ""subornare"" more commonly means ""under"" or ""below,"" but it has its stealthy denotation in the etymologies of several other English words, including ""surreptitious"" (from ""sub-"" and ""rapere,"" meaning ""to seize"") and the verb ""suspect"" (from ""sub-"" or ""sus-"" and ""specere,"" meaning ""to look at""). The ""ornare"" of ""subornare"" is also at work in the words ""ornate,"" ""adorn,"" and ""ornament.""] ""Would a senior lawyer, proven in a court of law to attempt to suborn a witness, be allowed to continue to practice law?"" - TSR Subramanian; It's Imperative to Free CBI and ED from Government Control; The New Indian Express (Chennai, India); Mar 3, 2013. ""Regulators were suborned by lobbyists and ministers."" - Simon Jenkins; Ignore Their Howls of Protest; The Guardian (London, UK); Mar 5, 2013."
adjure \uh-JOOR\	"transitive verb 1. To command solemnly. 2. To request earnestly. [""Adjure"" and its synonyms ""entreat,"" ""importune,"" and ""implore"" all mean ""to ask earnestly."" ""Entreat"" implies an effort to persuade or overcome resistance. ""Importune"" goes further, adding a sense of annoying persistence in trying to break down resistance to a request. ""Implore,"" on the other hand, suggests a great urgency or anguished appeal on the part of the speaker. ""Adjure"" implies advising as well as pleading, and is sometimes accompanied by the invocation of something sacred. Be careful not to confuse ""adjure"" with ""abjure,"" meaning ""to renounce solemnly"" or ""to abstain from."" Both words are rooted in Late ""jurare,"" meaning ""to swear,"" but ""adjure"" includes the prefix ""ad-,"" meaning ""to"" or ""toward,"" whereas ""abjure"" draws on ""ab-,"" meaning ""from"" or ""away.""] ""If you go to Las Vegas -- and so many do -- please pay mind to the signs in the park. They don't adjure you from feeding the pigeons. They forbid feeding the homeless."" - Jacquelyn Mitchard; Please Do Feed the Unsightly Homeless; Journal Sentinel (Milwaukee, Wisconsin); Oct 1, 2006. ""'Use Absolut,' he adjures a waiter at the restaurant."" - Amanda Vaill; A Story of Reckless Passion and Race; Chicago Tribune; May 25, 2003."
eustress	noun Stress that is deemed healthful or giving one the feeling of fulfillment.
Hibernian \hie-BUR-nee-uhn\	"adjective 1. Of, pertaining to, or characteristic of Ireland or its inhabitants; Irish. noun 2. A native of Ireland. [From Hibernia, the Latin name for Ireland. The word hibernate is from Latin hibernare (to spend the winter). Earliest documented use: 1632.] ""This lively bar is long on Hibernian charm, and patrons are smitten with the pub's thick Irish stew."" - Indianapolis Monthly; Sep 2008."
Cantabrigian \kant-uh-BRIJ-eeuh-n\	adjective 1. Of or relating to Cambridge, England, or Cambridge, Massachusetts. 2. Of or relating to Cambridge University. noun 1. A native or resident of Cambridge, England, or Cambridge, Massachusetts. 2. A student or graduate of Cambridge University.
tellurian \te-LOOR-ee-uhn\	adjective Relating to or inhabiting Earth. noun An inhabitant of Earth. [From Latin tellus (earth). Tellus, also known as Terra, was the goddess of the earth in Roman mythology. Earliest documented use: 1846.] “Life without him was less imaginable than a tellurian’s camping-tent on a mountain in the moon.” - Vladimir Nabokov; The Real Life of Sebastian Knight; New Directions Publishers; 1941. “We Tellurians, or Earth-dwellers, have always wondered about the existence of life on other worlds.” - Howard Williams; Book Briefs; The Press (Christchurch, New Zealand); Sep 29, 2007.
hypostatize \hi-POS-tuh-tahyz\	transitive verb To treat or regard (a concept, idea, etc.) as a distinct substance or reality.
meme \meem\	"noun A cultural item that is transmitted by repetition in a manner analogous to the biological transmission of genes. [Greek mimeisthaito imitate, copy; coined by U.S. biologist Richard Dawkins in his book ""The Selfish Gene"" in 1976.]"
ekistics \i-KIS-tiks\	"noun The science of human settlements, including city or community planning and design. [Ultimately from Greek oikistikos, of settlements, from oikistes, colonizer, founder, from oikizein, to settle, from oikos, house.] ""Konstantinos Doxiadis (1913-1975) was present at that meeting. He was a Greek architect who coined the term `ekistics' and led the movement for more thoughtful urban planning. According to (Wesley) Posvar, Doxiadis was preoccupied with the ills of city life. He thought the village format--where everything from family to food was within walking distance--was the perfect living unit."" - Rehan Nasir; Former Chancellor Still Active at U. Pittsburgh; University Wire; Nov 17, 1998."
booboisie \boo-bwa-ZEE\	noun A segment of the general public composed of uneducated, uncultured persons. [Blend of boob + bourgeoisie; coined by H.L. Mencken in 1922]
teetotal \tee-TOT-l\	"adjective 1. Of, relating to, or practicing complete abstinence from alcoholic beverages. 2. Total; absolute. [Probably partly tee (pronunciation of the first letter in total) + total (abstinence), and partly reduplication of total, coined by R. Turner, of Preston, England, in 1833, in a speech advocating total abstinence from alcoholic drinks] ""His wife's uncle, John Preston, described Dilorenzo to the commission as a virtual teetotal. `He's not a drinker mate,' he said."" - Accused policeman alleges death threats at PIC, AAP General News (Australia), 2 Nov 1999."
mondegreen \MON-di-green\	"noun A word or phrase resulting from mishearing a word or phrase. [Coined by author Sylvia Wright when she misinterpreted the line ""laid him on the green"" as ""Lady Mondegreen"" in the Scottish ballad ""The Bonny Earl of Murray"". Earliest documented use: 1954.] ""Since I live in Thailand, the most meaningful mondegreen for me was my own mishearing of a line from The Jam's Eton Rifles. Instead of the correct 'What chance do you have against a tie and a crest?', for years I heard 'What chance do you have against a Thai in a dress?'"" - Richard Watson Todd; Much Ado about English; Nicholas Brealey Publishing; May 1, 2007."
borborygmus \bor-buh-RIG-muhs\	noun A rumbling noise caused by the movement of gas through the intestines. [From Greek borborygmos (intestinal rumbling), an onomatopoeic word to describe the sound.]
steatopygia \stee-at-uh-PIJ-ee-uh\	noun An extreme accumulation of fat on the buttocks. [Steato- fat + Greek pyge, rump + -ia.]
eructate also eruct \i-RUK-tayt\	verb 1. To belch: to expel gases from the stomach through the mouth. 2. To emit violently, fumes from a volcano, for example. [From Latin eructare (to vomit, belch, discharge). Ultimately from the Indo-European root reug- (to vomit, to belch, smoke, cloud), which also gave us reek and German rauchen (to smoke). Earliest documented use: 1666.] “When cars behind start flashing and beeping, and he realises that we’re eructing huge clouds of choking black smoke as we chug and jerk along, we are forced to pull over.” - Lucy Caldwell; The Story So Far...; The Independent (London, UK); May 29, 2007.
megillah \meh-GIL-uh\	noun A long, tedious account. [From Yiddish megile (scroll), from Hebrew megillah, from galal (to roll). The term alludes to the length of the text in the Book of Esther which is read in its entirety, twice, during Purim, a Jewish festival.]
olla podrida \OL-uh puh-DREE-duh, po-THREE-thah\	"noun 1. A stew of highly seasoned meat and vegetables. 2. An assorted mixture; a miscellany. [Spanish : olla, + podrida, feminine of podrido, rotten (from Latin putridus).] ""Alice Randall's collection of cookbooks is formidable, an olla podrida of Junior League and soul food cookbooks and classics like The Joy of Cooking."" - Penelope Green; What Matters Most; The New York Times; Sep 16, 2009."
satori \suh-TOR-ee\	noun Sudden enlightenment. [Japanese, noun derivative of verb to awaken (sato- aware + -r formative affix)]
precatory \PREK-uh-tor-ee\	"adjective: 1. Expressing a request. 2. Nonbinding: only expressing a wish or giving a suggestion. [Nowadays, you're most likely to see ""precatory"" used in legal contexts to distinguish statements that merely express a wish from those that create a legal obligation. For example, if you add a provision to your will asking someone to take care of your pet if you die, that provision is merely precatory. Outside of jurisprudence, you might see references to such things as ""precatory dress codes"" or ""precatory stockholder proposals"" -- all of which are non-binding. ""Precatory” traces to Latin ""precari"" (""to pray""), and it has always referred to something in the nature of an entreaty or supplication. For example, a precatory hymn is one that beseeches “from sin and sorrow set us free” -- versus a laudatory hymn (that is, one giving praise).]"
discalced \dis-KALST\	"adjective Without shoes. [From Latin dis- (apart, away) + calceare (to fit with shoes), from calceus (shoe), from calx (heel). The word discalced is often used of members of religious orders who go barefoot or wear sandals.] ""There were several pairs of shoes involved as well, which the otherwise discalced women had a hard time getting on and off."" - Christine Temin; 'Straight Up!' Falls Down With Dance Premieres; The Boston Globe; Feb 11, 2005."
juvenescent \joo-veh-NES-ent\	"adjective Becoming young or youthful. [Latin iuvenescens, iuvenescent-, present participle of iuvenescere, to reach the age of youth, from iuvenis, young.] ""To him, I am perennially juvenescent, a toddler with a worrisome weakness for cigars."" - Alexander Frater, South Seas, Los Angeles Times, 25 Apr 1999."
gerent \JIR-ent\	"noun One that rules or manages. [From Latin gerens, gerent-, present participle of gerere, to manage.] ""Great deputy, the welkin's vice-gerent, and sole dominator of Navarre...."" - Shakespeare, William, Love's Labour's Lost: Scene I. The King of Navarre's Park."
pettifogger \PET-ee-foguhr, -fo-guhr\	"noun 1. A petty, quibbling, unscrupulous lawyer. 2. One who quibbles over trivia. [Probably petty + obsolete fogger, pettifogger.] ""The nitpickers, the whiners, the pettifoggers are everywhere. And they are so numerous and so noisy that they threaten to block our view of and drown out the clarion call of the squirrels."" - Bill Kraus, Without Health Care Reform, Forget It, Capital Times, 15 Dec 1993."
dotard \doe-tuhrd\	noun A person who is in his or her dotage (a deterioration of mental faculties; senility). [Middle English, from doten, to dote.]
raffish \RAF-ish\	"adjective 1. Cheaply or showily vulgar in appearance or nature; tawdry. 2. Characterized by a carefree or fun-loving unconventionality; rakish. [Probably from dialectal raff, rubbish, from Middle English raf, perhaps of Scandinavian origin.] ""Curiously for so drab a creature, he had a taste for raffish friends."" - Philip Ziegler, Books: The grey Prime Minister Philip Ziegler finds little but politics in a politician's Life, The Daily Telegraph, 10 Apr 1999."
schnorrer \SHNOR-uhr\	"noun One who habitually takes advantage of others' generosity, often through an air of entitlement. [From Yiddish, from German schnurren (to purr, hum, or whir), from the sound of a beggar's musical instrument.] ""Wilberforce opens his dining room to every schnorrer who appears at the door."" - Jan Stuart; Fighting a Good Fight; Newsday (New York); Feb 23, 2007."
whelp \hwelp, welp\	noun 1. A young offspring of a mammal, such as a dog or wolf. 2. A child; a youth. An impudent young fellow. 3. A tooth of a sprocket wheel. Nautical. Any of the ridges on the barrel of a windlass or capstan. verb intr. To give birth to whelps or a whelp. verb tr. To give birth to (whelps or a whelp). [Middle English, from Old English hwelp.]
gosling \GOZ-ling\	noun 1. A young goose. 2. A naive or inexperienced young person. [Middle English, variant (influenced by gos, goose), of gesling, from Old Norse gaeslingr, diminutive of gas.]
leveret \LEV-uhr-it\	noun A young hare, especially one less than a year old. [Middle English, from Anglo-Norman, diminutive of levere, hare, from Latin lepus, lepor-.]
pollywog \POL-ee-wog\	noun The limbless aquatic larva of a frog or toad, having gills and a long flat tail. As the polliwog approaches the adult stage, legs and lungs develop, and the tail gradually disappears. Also called tadpole. [Variant of polliwig, from Middle English polwigle : pol, head + wiglen, to wiggle.]
cygnet \SIG-nit\	noun A young swan. [Middle English cignet, from Anglo-Norman, diminutive of Old French cygne, swan, from Latin cygnus, from Greek kuknos.]
Junoesque \joo-noe-ESK\	adjective Having the stately bearing and imposing beauty of the goddess Juno. [After Juno, the principal goddess of the Pantheon, the wife and sister of Jupiter and the patroness primarily of marriage and the well-being of women.]
Aesculapian \es-kyuh-LAY-pee-ehn\	"adjective Relating to medicine. noun A doctor. [After Aesculapius, the god of medicine and healing in Greco-Roman mythology. One of his daughters was named Hygieia. Earliest documented use: 1604. The Rod of Aesculapius (⚕), a single snake around a staff is used as a symbol related to medicinal arts, though sometimes it is confused with caduceus (☤), the staff of Hermes, with wings and two snakes around it.] ""Dr. Rollins, the eminent Aesculapian, is having a secret affair with A.J. Morgan."" Francine Pascal; Sweet Valley Confidential; St. Martin's Press; 2011."
Pandora's Box \pan-DOR-uhz boks\	"noun A source of many unforeseen troubles. [In Greek mythology Pandora received a ""gift"" of a jar which she was told never to open. Her curiosity got the better of her. She opened the lid, and out came its contents: all the evils of human life.] ""Many midwives avoid asking difficult questions, says Stanley, 'because they know that if they open the Pandora's box, they simply will not have the resources to offer the support that the woman will need.'"" - Lucy Atkins; I Felt Completely Out of Control; The Guardian (London, UK); Jan 29, 2008."
pintle \PIN-tl\	"noun 1. A pin or a bolt on which another part pivots. 2. Nautical. The pin on which a rudder turns. 3. The pin on which a gun carriage revolves. 4. A hook or a bolt on the rear of a towing vehicle for attaching a gun or trailer. [Middle English pintel, from Old English, penis.] ""My summer home has shutters hung on hinges so I can close them in winter. The hinges consist of a pintle, set on the frame of the window to form a standing pin ...."" - Peter Hotten, An Old Trunk Gets a New Look, Denver Rocky Mountain News, 1 Nov 1997."
tragus \TRAY-guhs\	noun, plural tragi (-gi, -ji) 1. The projection of little flap in front of the ear. 2. Any of the hairs growing at the entrance of the ear. [New Latin, from Greek tragos, goat, hairy part of the ear.]
grommet \GROM-it\ also grummet \GRUM-\	"noun 1. A reinforced eyelet, as in cloth or leather, through which a fastener may be passed. A small metal or plastic ring used to reinforce such an eyelet. 2. Nautical. A loop of rope or metal used for securing the edge of a sail to its stay. [Probably from obsolete French gromette, gormette, chain joining the ends of a bit, from Old French, from gourmer, to bridle.] ""`... my foot was pinched both under the laces and under the grommets,' noted John."" Hostetter, - Kristin, Featherweight Footwear, Backpacker, 1 Dec 1998."
philtrum \FIL-truhm\	noun The vertical groove in the upper lip. [From Greek philtron, philter, charm, dimple in the upper lip]
aglet \AG-lit\	noun 1. A tag or metal sheath on the end of a lace, cord, or ribbon to facilitate its passing through eyelet holes. 2. A similar device used for an ornament. [Middle English, from Old French aguillette, diminutive of aguille, needle, from Vulgar Latin *acucula, from Late Latin acucula, diminutive of Latin acus, needle.]
Parnassian \pahr-NAS-ee-uhn\	"adjective Of or relating to poetry. [From Latin Parnassius, of Parnassus, from Greek parnasios after Parnasos (Parnassus), a mountain in Greece sacred to Apollo and the Muses.] noun A member of a school of late 19th-century French poets whose work is characterized by detachment and emphasis on metrical form. [From French parnassien after Le Parnasse contemporain, the group's first anthology of poetry (1866), from Parnasse, Parnassus, from Latin Parnassus, from Greek Parnasos.] ""Whether scaling to Parnassian heights or plunging inward to insight, the poems' impeccable musicality and craftsmanship will win the trust and admiration of many."" - Fiction Reviews; Publishers Weekly (New York); Oct 15, 2007."
topos \TOH-pohs\ [plural topoi]	"noun A traditional theme or motif; a literary convention. [Greek, short for (koinos) topos, (common)place.] ""[T]he Israeli-Palestinian conflict has served authors of thrillers as a topos to write about from the vantage point of world-weary observers ...."" - Hillel Halkin, The Jerusalem Syndrome, The New Republic, 25 May 1998."
hamartia \ha-mar-TEE-uh\	noun Tragic flaw. [Greek, from hamartanein, to miss the mark, err.]
panoply \PAN-uh-plee\	noun 1. A wide-ranging array of resources. 2. A full suit of armor. 3. A protective covering. 4. A ceremonial attire or paraphernalia. [From Greek panoplia (a complete suit of armor), from pan (all) + hopla (arms, armor), plural of hoplon (weapon).]
limnology \lim-NOL-uh-jee\	"noun The study of bodies of fresh water, such as lakes and ponds. [From Greek limne (lake) + -logy (study). Limnophilous, the word to describe an organism living in lakes, pools, etc., has four consecutive letters from the alphabet.] ""Retired professor and head of the department of limnology, Dr VJ Druve, pointed out that the state is abundant in water resources with high potential for inland fish production."" - PJ Joychen; Udaipur Fisheries College Crying For Attention; The Times of India (New Delhi); Jun 16, 2008."
isohyet \eye-soh-HIGH-it\	"noun A line drawn on a map connecting points that receive equal amounts of rainfall. [Iso- + Greek huetos, rain.] ""In the 1860s, South Australians had been advised not to farm north of Goyder line, an isohyet that separated arable land from semi desert."" - Best, Daryl, Australia's Greentime history, History Today, 1 Oct 1997."
coryphaeus \kohr-uh-FEE-uhs\ [plural coryphaei (-FEE-eye)]	noun 1. The leader of a Greek chorus. 2. A leader or spokesperson. [Latin, leader, from Greek koruphaios, from koruphe, head.]
primogenitor \pry-moe-JEN-i-tuhr\	"noun 1. The earliest ancestor. 2. An ancestor or a forefather. [Late Latin primogenitor : Latin primo, at first (from primus, first.) + Latin genitor, begetter, from gignere, genit-, to beget.] ""Primogeniture! I remembered that, from History 1A. But to hear of this law in reality, in this century, struck me. How could they give all this to one child, leaving the other three without?"" - Marjorie Leet Ford; The Diary of an American Au Pair; Anchor Books; 2011."
progenitor \pro-JEN-i-tuhr\	noun 1. A direct ancestor. 2. An originator of a line of descent; a precursor. 3. An originator; a founder. [Middle English progenitour, from Old French progeniteur, from Latin progenitor, from progenitus, past participle of progignere, to beget : pro-, forward. + gignere, gen-, to beget.]
enate \EE-nayt, i-NAYT\	noun Someone related on the mother's side. adjective Related on one's mother's side. Also enatic. Growing outward. [From Latin enatus, past participle of enasci (to issue forth), from e-, from ex- (out) + nasci (to be born).] Agnate is the term for someone related on the father's side. Cognate is the generic term meaning having a common ancestor.
puce \pyoos\	"noun A dark red or brownish purple color. adjective Of this color. [From French puce (flea), from Latin pulex (flea). Earliest documented use: 1778. Other terms coined after the flea are flea market, a direct translation of French marché aux puces and ukulele (from Hawaiian, literally leaping flea, perhaps from the rapid motion of the fingers in playing it).] ""An increasingly puce Mr Farage complained about Britain's loss of sovereignty."" - The Third Man; The Economist (London, UK); Mar 29, 2014."
versicolor \VUR-si-kul-uhr\	adjective 1. Having a variety of colors; variegated. 2. Changing in color; iridescent. [Latin : versus, past participle of vertere, to turn + color.]
tawny \TAW-nee\	noun A light brown to brownish orange. [Middle English, from Anglo-Norman taune, variant of Old French tane, from past participle of taner, to tan.]
testaceous \teh-STAY-shuhs\	"adjective 1. Having a shell. 2. Having the reddish brown color of bricks or baked clay. [From Latin testa (shell).] ""I am informed by Mr. F. Smith that the male ants of several species are black, the females being testaceous."" - Charles Darwin; The Descent Of Man; 1871."
interdigitate \in-ter-DIJ-uh-tayt\	verb To become interlocked like the fingers of folded hands.
noetic \noh-ET-ik\	"adjective Of, relating to, or based on the intellect. [""Noetic"" derives from the Greek adjective ""noetikos,"" meaning ""intellectual,"" from the verb ""noein"" (""to think"") and ultimately from the noun ""nous,"" meaning ""mind."" (""Nous"" also gave English the word ""paranoia"" by joining with a prefix meaning ""faulty"" or ""abnormal."") ""Noetic"" is related to ""noesis,"" a rare noun that turns up in the field of philosophy and refers to the action of perceiving or thinking. The most notable use of ""noetic"" might be in the name of the Institute of Noetic Sciences, a research organization based in California that is devoted to studies of consciousness and the mind.] ""This `noetic Casanova,' as Gleick calls him (Richard Feynman), put science next to sex, where it belongs in alphabetical order. His books are full of brainy pranks and skirt-chasing honed to a science of its own."" - Thomas A. Bass, Casanova of the Mind, Genius: The Life and Science of Richard Feynman (book review), The Los Angeles Times, Nov 1, 1992. ""The former literature professor (Paul LeBlanc) says: `Before the invention of writing, the most important intellectual skill you could possess was the ability to memorize. After writing was invented, however, our noetic economy shifted.'"" - Linton Weeks, Ten-Track Mind: We Do Everything at Once. But Are We Forgetting Something?, The Washington Post, May 26, 1999."
asperity \ah-SPER-i-tee\	"noun Harshness or roughness. [Via French from Latin asper (rough)] ""We must expect posterity to view with some asperity the marvels and the wonders we're passing on to it; but it should change its attitude to one of heartfelt gratitude when thinking of the blunders we didn't quite commit."" - Our Greatest Achievement; Piet Hein; Grooks. ""Dressed in Robert Jones's well-cut, earth-toned '60s' pantsuits, Lagerfelt wittily mixes languor and asperity."" - David Benedict; Greta Garbo Came to Donegal; Variety (Los Angeles); Jan 13, 2010."
obscurantism \uhb-SKYOOR-uhn-tiz-uhm, ob-skyoo-RAN-tiz-uhm\	"noun 1. Opposition to the spread of knowledge. 2. Being deliberately vague or obscure; also a style in art and literature. [From Latin obscurare (to make dark).] ""Jeane Kirkpatrick possessed the rare gift of being able to write subtle and challenging studies of international politics and to formulate strikingly simple and apt phrases to cut through obscurantism and cant."" - Joseph P. Duggan; Jeane Kirkpatrick Set a Very High Bar; St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri); Dec 18, 2006."
sedulous \SEJ-uh-luhs\	"adjective Involving great care, effort, and persistence. [From Latin se (without) + dolus (trickery, guile). Ultimately from the Indo-European root del- (to count or recount) that is also the source of tell, tale, talk, and Dutch taal (speech, language).] ""Elizabeth Bishop was sedulous, pernickety, quietly determined; she would work on poems for years."" - Elizabeth Bishop and Robert Lowell; The Economist (London, UK); Nov 20, 2008."
quinquagenarian \kwing-kwuh-juh-NAR-ee-uhn\	"noun A person 50 years old, or in his or her fifties. adjective Of or characteristic of a person in his or her fifties. [From Latin quinquagenarius, containing fifty, from quinquageni, fifty each, from quinquaginta, fifty.] ""The quinquagenarian performer is also now talking about making his recent Madison Square Garden birthday event, benefiting Save The Children, into an annual affair."" - Marilyn Beck, Rock Icon David Bowie Enjoys Return to Spotlight, Denver Rocky Mountain News, 11 Feb 1997."
googolplex \GOO-gol-pleks\	noun The number 10 raised to the power googol, written out as the numeral 1 followed by 10 raised to 100 zeros. [Googol + -plex as in duplex.]
decuple \DEK-yuh-puhl\	"adjective 1. Ten times as great; tenfold. 2. In groups of ten. [Middle English, from Old French, from Late Latin decuplus : Latin decem, ten + Latin -plus, -fold.] ""The second type consists of multiples of thirty that are either decupled multiples, which means that the figure thirty is increased tenfold, hundredfold, etc. as in 300, 3,000 or 3,000,000 ...."" - Scheidel, Walter, Finances, figures and fiction, The Classical Quarterly, 15 Jan 96."
sexagesimal \sek-suh-JES-uh-muhl\	adjective Of, relating to, or based on the number 60. [From Latin sexagesimus, sixtieth.]
lustrum \LUHS-truhm\	noun 1. Also, luster; especially British, lustre. A period of five years. 2. Roman History. A lustration or ceremonial purification of the people, performed every five years, after the taking of the census.
vicennial \vahy-SEN-ee-uh\	adjective 1. Of or for 20 years. 2. Occurring every 20 years.
epopee \EP-uh-pee\	"noun Epic poetry or an epic poem. [From Greek epopoiia, from epos (song) + poiein (to make).] ""The struggle between the sons of the moon and those of the sun, between the Kauravas and the Pandavas form the subject of the great Hindu epopee, the Mahabharata."" - Edouard Schure; Krishna & Orpheus; Kessinger Publishing; 1995."
trope \rhymes with scope\	"noun The figurative use of a word or an expression, as metaphor or hyperbole. An instance of this use; a figure of speech; The trope of the perpetual journey. [Latin tropus, from Greek tropos, turn, figure of speech.] ""The trope of the perpetual journey, continuously wandering and witnessing the wonders and the horrors of the Arab World, is a salient feature in both of the poems examined here."" Bardenstein, Carol, Stirring words: traditions and subversions in the poetry of Muzaffar al-Nawwab. (Modern Iraqi Literature in English Translation), Arab Studies Quarterly (ASQ), 22 Sep 1997."
macaronic \mak-ah-RON-ik\	"adjective Involving a mixture of languages. [From Latin macaronicus, from Italian dialect maccarone (macaroni), probably alluding to the jumble of macaroni and sauce on a plate.] ""Speaking not in the gleefully macaronic English that has made for such good, clownish copy in the past, but in his native Italian, he sounded serious and reflective as he answered questions about his age, his health, and his dwindling plans for the future."" - Justin Davidson; Pavarotti Winds Down; Newsday (New York); Mar 11, 1998."
antonomasia \an-toh-noh-MAY-zhuh\	noun 1. The use of an epithet or title for a proper name, for example, the Bard for Shakespeare. 2. The use of the name of a person known for a particular quality to describe others, such as calling someone brainy as Einstein. Also known as eponym. [From Latin, from Greek antonomazein (to name differently), from anti- (instead of) + onoma (name). Earliest documented use: 1589.] “In Florence, a rich and famous city of Italy, in the province called Tuscany, there dwelt two rich and principal gentlemen called Anselmo and Lothario, which two were so great friends, as they were named for excellency, and by antonomasia, by all those who knew them, the Two Friends.” - Miguel de Cervantes; Don Quixote of the Mancha. (Translation: Thomas Shelton) “One of my favourites among Obama’s tricks was his use of the phrase ‘a young preacher from Georgia’, when accepting the Democratic nomination this August; he did not name Martin Luther King. The term for the technique is antonomasia. One example from Cicero is the way he refers to Phoenix, Achilles’ mentor in the Iliad, as ‘senior magister’ -- ‘the aged teacher’. In both cases, it sets up an intimacy between speaker and audience, the flattering idea that we all know what we are talking about without need for further exposition.” - Charlotte Higgins; The New Cicero; The Guardian (London, UK); Nov 26, 2008.
chiasmus \ki-AZ-muhs\	"noun To reverse the order of a phrase in the same sentence. Never let a fool kiss you or a kiss fool you Ask not what your country can do for your but what you can do for you country. [New Latin, from Greek khiasmos, syntactic inversion, from khiazein, to invert or mark with an X.] ""As a literary and rhetorical device, chiasmus has woven itself into the fabric of human life. The greatest speeches of all time would be weaker without chiasmus. What other words could JFK have used to rival his famous `Ask not what your country can do for you' line."" - Dr. Mardy Grothe; Never Let A Fool Kiss You or A Kiss Fool You; Viking, 1999."
Mae West \may west\	"noun An inflatable, vestlike life preserver. [After Mae West 1892?-1980, American actress known for her sultry stage persona, (from its resemblance to her curvaceous torso).] ""Now with all of us bulging out of our Mae Wests, a Richter scale applied to anxiety would have registered eight or a full-scale breakdown."" - Robert Schrank, Two Women, Three Men on a Raft, Harvard Business Review, 1 May 1994."
fardel \FAHR-dl\	"noun 1. A pack; a bundle. 2. A burden. [Middle English, from Old French, diminutive of farde, package, from Arabic fardah.] ""Shepherd: Sir, there lies such secrets in this fardel and box, which none must know but the king; and which he shall know within this hour, if I may come to the speech of him."" - Shakespeare, William, The Winter's Tale: Act IV, Scene IV."
supernal \soo-PUR-nuhl\	adjective 1. Celestial; heavenly. 2. Of, coming from, or being in the sky or high above. [Middle English, from Old French, from Latin supernus.]
aleatory \AY-lee-uh-tor-ee, -tohr-ee\	"adjective 1. Dependent on chance, luck, or an uncertain outcome. 2. Of or characterized by gambling. 3. Also aleatoric. Music. Using or consisting of sounds to be chosen by the performer or left to chance; indeterminate. [Latin aleatorius, from aleator, gambler, from alea, dice.] ""Here is a typical and wonderful passage, not cited by Ryan, from Experience and Nature: Man finds himself living in an aleatory world; his existence involves, to put it baldly, a gamble."" - Holmes, Stephen, John Dewey and the High Tide of American Liberalism (book reviews), The New Republic, 11 Mar 1996. ""There are bursts of outward energy and dissonance set off by lengths of inner lyricism, there is a fascination with near-Eastern sounds that would emerge so strongly in the Oboe Concerto and the opera, and there are freewheeling passages that would eventually become stretches of out-and-out aleatory music."" - John Ardoin, Early concerto presages Corigliano's brilliance, The Dallas Morning News, 25 Aug 1996."
Nisei \nee-SAY, NEE-say\	noun A person born in America of parents who emigrated from Japan. [Japanese : ni, second + sei, generation.]
ikebana \ee-ke-BAH-nah, ik-uh-\	"noun The Japanese art of formal flower arrangement with special regard shown to balance, harmony, and form. [Japanese : ikeru, to arrange + hana, flower.] ""For Alice Tuan, a casual glance at an ikebana, or flower arrangement, book blossomed into her latest play, aptly titled Ikebana. `Flowers get cut off from their roots and are put into a new container,' said the Los Angeles-based Tuan, who is currently a graduate student at Brown University in Rhode Island. `There's something about that metaphor that spoke to me on an immigration level. People are cut from their natural roots of their homeland and are put into a new container that is their new country.'"" - Sam Chu Lin, Immigrant Arrangements, AsianWeek, 19 Dec 1996."
lodestar also loadstar \LOAD-stahr\	noun 1. A star, especially Polaris, that is used as a point of reference. 2. A guiding principle, interest, or ambition. [Middle English lodesterre : lode, way + sterre, star.]
theomachy \thee-OM-eh-kee\	noun Strife or battle among gods, as in the Homeric poems. [Greek theomakhia : theo- + makhia, fighting (from makhe, battle).]
talion \TAL-ee-uhn\	"noun A punishment identical to the offense, as the death penalty for murder. [Middle English talioun, from Anglo-Norman, from Latin talio, talion-.] ""Retribution (`a life for a life') has been a more popular reason than belief in deterrence since 1981. It is possible that people were more reluctant to express retributive motives a decade earlier, but we have no comparable data. Support for the law of talion has increased over the past 10 years, but far more striking is the marked decrease in the proportion of people who spontaneously give general deterrence as their reason."" - Ellsworth, Phoebe C., Gross, Samuel R., Hardening of the attitudes: Americans' views on the death penalty, Journal of Social Issues, 22 Jun 94."
Hobson's choice \HOB-suhnz chois\	"noun An apparently free choice that offers no real alternative. [After T. Hobson (1544-1631), a liveryman who offered his customers the choice of renting the horse near the stable door or none at all. Hobson had some 40 animals in his rent-a-horse business and a straightforward system: a returning horse goes to the end of the line, and the horse at the top of the line gets to serve next. He had good intentions -- rotating horses so his steeds received good rest and an equal wear, but his heavy-handed enforcement of the policy didn't earn him any customer service stars. He could have offered his clients the option of choosing one of the two horses nearest the stable door, for instance, and still achieve nearly the same goal. More recently Henry Ford offered customers a Ford Model T in any color as long as it was black.] ""There, many are given a legal Hobson's choice: Plead guilty and go home or ask for a lawyer and spend longer in custody."" - Sean Webby; No Lawyer in Sight for Many Making Way Through System; San Jose Mercury News (California); Dec 30, 2009."
Job's comforter \johbz KUM-fuhr-tuhr\	noun A person who tries to console or help someone and not only fails but ends up making the other feel worse. [Originally there was not just one, but three Job's comforters. In the Biblical story these people tried to console Job, an upright person, that his troubles must be divine retribution for his sins. There are Job's comforters in current times as well: soon after any disaster these TV preachers are ready to explain how the afflicted had offended gods and brought it upon themselves.]
expediency /ek-SPEE-dee-uhn-see/	"noun 1. Consideration of what is advantageous, easy or immediate over what is right. 2. The quality of being suited for a purpose. [From Latin expedire (to make ready, to set the feet free), from ex- (out of) + ped- (foot). Ultimately from the Indo-European root ped- (foot) which gave us peccadillo (alluding to a stumble or fall), pedal, impeccable, podium, octopus, and impeach] ""Political expediency means that a lot of planning is still short term."" - Elizabeth Sidiropoulos & Lyal White; How Brazil Beats Poverty Trap; Mail & Guardian (Johannesburg, South Africa); Aug 25, 2009."
lavaliere \lav-uh-LIR\ also lavalliere \la-va-LYAR\	"noun A pendant worn on a chain around the neck. [French lavalliere, type of necktie after Duchesse de La Valliere, title of Francoise Louise de la Baume Le Blanc.] ""Chung's concluding remarks describe an obvious interview situation, including hot lights blaring and a lavaliere microphone clipped to Mrs. Gingrich's clothing."" - Knox, John M., On the record or off the record? How much should you say in an interview?, Communication World, 1 Mar 1995."
tar baby \tahr BAY-bee\	"noun Something to be avoided: a sticky situation or problem from which it's almost impossible to extricate oneself. [After ""Brer Rabbit and the Tar Baby"", one of the folk stories compiled by Joel Chandler Harris (1848-1908) in Uncle Remus: His Songs and His Sayings. In the story, Brer Fox tries to trap Brer Rabbit by making a baby doll out of tar and puts it on the side of the road. Earliest documented use: 1881, in the above-mentioned story.] ""The Nixon tar baby clung to Mr. Ford. A month after taking office he pardoned the ex-president, immediately dissipating much of the good will derived from his handling of the White House changeover."" - Editorial; A Ford, Not a Lincoln; The Blade (Toledo, Ohio); Dec 28, 2006."
bacchant \buh-KANT, -KAHNT, BAK-uhnt\	noun (plural bacchants or bacchantes) 1. A priest or votary of Bacchus. 2. A boisterous reveler. [Latin bacchans, bacchant-,present participle of bacchari, to celebrate the festival of Bacchus, from Bacchus (the god of wine and of an orgiastic religion celebrating the power and fertility of nature, also called Dionysus) from Greek Bakkhos.]
surcease \suhr-SEES\	"noun Stoppage, especially a temporary one. verb To bring or come to an end. [From Middle English sursesen/surcesen, via French from Latin supersedere (to refrain from), from super- + sedere (to sit). Ultimately from the Indo-European root sed- (to sit) that is also the source of sit, chair, saddle, assess, assiduous, sediment, soot, cathedral, and tetrahedron. The word cease is unrelated, though its spelling has influenced the word.] ""It was a labour without rest or surcease."" - Canon Kik Woods; The Daily Telegraph (London, UK); Jan 16, 2008."
colubrine \KAHL-yuh-bryne\	"adjective Snakelike. [""Colubrine"" may be less common than other animal words, such as ""canine,"" ""feline,"" and ""bovine,"" but it has been around for a good long while. Ultimately derived from the Latin ""colubra"" (""snake""), it slithered into the English language in the 16th century. (""Cobra,"" by the way, comes from the same Latin word, but entered English through Portuguese.) Some other words for ""snakelike"" are ""serpentine"" (a more common alternative) and ""ophidian"" (from the Greek word for snake: ""ophis"").]"
Hoosegow \HOOS-gou\	"noun A jail [From Spanish juzgado (court), past participle of juzgar (to judge), from Latin judicare (to judge). Ultimately from Indo-European root deik- (to show or to pronounce solemnly) that is also the source of other words such as judge, verdict, vendetta, revenge, indicate, dictate, and paradigm. Like the word hoosegow there is another slang term for prison that came from Spanish: calaboose, from Spanish calabozo (dungeon).] ""Throughout 2002 and 2003, the CIA sent Chertoff urgent questions asking whether various 'interrogation protocols' could get their agents sent to the hoosegow."" - Chris Floyd; Criminal World; The St. Petersburg Times (Russia); Feb 8, 2005. ""The historic looking hoosegow features a pair of cells complete with iron locks and keys designed by Rose himself."" - Timothy Mitchell; From Books to 'Book 'em'; Hamilton Ravalli Republic (Montana); Feb 1, 2005."
Mrs. Grundy \MISS-uz-GRUN-dee\	"noun One marked by prudish conventionality in personal conduct. [""What would Mrs. Grundy say?"" Dame Ashfield, a character in Thomas Morton's 1798 play Speed the Plough, was continually asking that question and worrying about invoking the sneering condemnation of her prudish neighbor, Mrs. Grundy. Although Mrs. Grundy never actually appeared on stage during the play, her critical attitude exerted a significant influence on the actions of other characters, and ultimately on the English language. By 1813, English speakers had adopted her name as a byword for anyone with extremely rigid standards of propriety that he or she applied in judging the actions of others.] ""As the author sits at the bullring reflecting on the mysteries of the corrida, he gets to talking with an old lady, a Mrs Grundy or Mme Salieri, the spirit of respectable gentility doing her best with a challenging new experience."" - David Thomson, Arts : Moving Pictures, Independent on Sunday, 17 Nov 1996."
forsaken \fawr-SEY-kuhn\	verb 1. pp. of forsake (to abandon/desert; to give up or renounce). adjective 2. Deserted; abandoned; forlorn: an old, forsaken farmhouse.
phlegmatic \fleg-MAT-ik\	"adjective 1. Having a sluggish temperament; apathetic. 2. Calm or composed. [From Latin phlegmaticus, from Greek phlegmatikos, from phlegm (inflammation, the humor phlegm supposedly as a result of heat), from phlegein (to burn). ] ""So why are Israelis almost hysterical about the Iranian threat, while South Koreans are phlegmatic about the North Korean threat?"" - Gwynne Dyer; Koreans, Israelis and Nukes; The Korea Times (Seoul); May 26, 2009."
coeval \koh-EE-vul\	adjective Of the same or equal age, antiquity, or duration.
oligopoly \ol-i-GOP-uh-lee\	noun A market condition where there are few sellers.
theogony \thee-OG-uh-nee\	noun The origin of gods or an account of this.
raj \RAHJ\	noun 1. Rule; especially often capitalized: the former British rule of the Indian subcontinent. 2. The period of British rule in India.
Annie Oakley \AN-ee OHK-lee\	"noun A free ticket. [Phoebe Anne Oakley Moses (1860-1926) starred in Buffalo Bill's Wild West Show, where she astonished the crowds with feats of marksmanship such as shooting the spots out of playing cards. It wasn't long until her audience noticed that the shot-out card looked like a ticket that had been punched by a train conductor. By 1910, the name ""Annie Oakley"" was not only synonymous with sharp-shooting but with the ticket-playing card connection, and complimentary tickets have been ""Annie Oakleys"" ever since.] ""The sales representative gave her client a pair of Annie Oakleys to the golf tournament."""
panjandrum \pan-JAN-druhm\	"noun An important or self-important person. [The word is said to have been coined by dramatist and actor Samuel Foote (1720-1777) as part of a nonsensical passage to test the memory of his fellow actor Charles Macklin who claimed to be able to repeat anything after hearing it once. Earliest documented use: 1825, in the novel ""Harry and Lucy Concluded"" in which the author Maria Edgeworth attributes the word to Foote.] ""Another man coming to hear Fry was Graham Turner, the owner, chairman, former manager and grand panjandrum of Hereford United."""
diffident \DIF-i-duhnt\	"adjective 1. Lacking confidence in one's own ability, worth, or fitness; timid; shy. 2. Restrained or reserved in manner, conduct, etc. [From Latin diffidere (to mistrust), from dis- (not) + fidere (to trust). Ultimately from the Indo-European root bheidh- (to trust), which also gave us abide, abode, fiancé, affidavit, confide, confident, defiance, fidelity, defy, and infidel. Earliest documented use: 1598.] ""In contrast with Albert's bonhomie, Philippe seems shy and diffident."" - Sire, There are No Belgians; The Economist (London, UK); Jul 27, 2013."
effulgence \ih-FULL-junss\	"noun Radiant splendor, brilliance. [""Effulgence"" derives from the Latin verb ""fulgere,"" which means ""to shine."" ""Fulgere"" is also the root of ""fulgent,"" a synonym of ""radiant"" that English speakers have used since the 15th century. Another related word, ""refulgence,"" is about 30 years older than ""effulgence."" ""Refulgence"" carries a meaning similar to ""effulgence"" but sometimes goes further by implying reflectivity, as in ""the refulgence of the knight’s gleaming armor.""]"
adiabatic \ad-ee-uh-BAT-ik\	adjective Occurring without gain or loss of heat (opposed to diabatic - occurring with an exchange of heat): an adiabatic process.
recondite \REK-uhn-dahyt\	"adjective 1. Concerned with a profound, esoteric, or difficult subject. 2. Little known; obscure. [From Latin recondere (to hide), re- (back) + condere (to put together), from con- (with) + -dere (to put). Earliest documented use: 1619.] ""With its fragmented words, multilingual puns and recondite allusions, the verse of Paul Celan hovers on the edge of untranslatability."" - Mark M. Anderson; A Poet at War With His Language; The New York Times; Dec 31, 2000. ""The sight of beautiful people making beautiful babies is a huge turn-on; but a recondite TV actress dying in a state of dementia, as Marty would say, 'not so much'."" - Lynn Crosbie; Brangelina Babies; The Globe and Mail (Toronto, Canada); Aug 5, 2008."
spoor \spoor, spawr, spohr\	noun The track or trail of an animal, especially a wild animal being hunted. verb To track an animal by its trail; to follow a spoor.
Endymion \en-DIM-ee-uhn\	noun Classical Mythology. A young man kept forever youthful through eternal sleep and loved by Selene.
Fleet Street	"noun The British press. [After Fleet Street in London, once the center of British journalism. Even though most of the news agencies have moved away from the street, its name continues to be synonymous with the British newspaper industry. The street is named after the River Fleet, now flowing underground.] ""Welcome to the liveliest fight on Fleet Street. In the blue corner, we have Rupert Murdoch, chief executive of News Corp. In the red corner, Alan Rusbridger, editor of The Guardian. Each wants to knock out the other's vision of the future of journalism."" - Eric Pfanner; Free vs. Paid, Murdoch vs. Rusbridger; The New York Times; Feb 7, 2010."
Star Chamber	"noun A court or group marked by arbitrary, oppressive, and secretive procedures. [After the Star Chamber in the Palace of Westminster in London. It was the site of a closed-door court appointed by King Henry VII of England in the 15th century. Notorious for its abuse of power -- rulings made in secret, no appeal -- it was abolished by the Long Parliament in 1641. The chamber was so named because its ceiling was decorated with stars.] ""'This is the most incredible Star Chamber proceeding, the most incredible lack of due process I've ever heard of,' Mitchelson said. 'I'm the alleged perpetrator, and I was not even invited.'"" - Edward J. Boyer; Mitchelson Angry, Vows to Block Aid for Two Women; The Los Angeles Times; Jan 25, 1989."
billingsgate \BIL-ingz-gayt, -git\	"noun Vulgar, abusive language. [After Billingsgate fish market in London, once notorious for the foul language of its fishmongers. A related word is fishwife, a synonym for a vulgar-tongued woman.] ""Kitty Warren is articulate when needed but when threatened or challenged, guttersnipe dialect and billingsgate dominate."" - Ted Hadley; Shaw Play Masterfully Tackles Taboo Topics; Buffalo News (New York); Jul 25, 2008."
guttersnipe \GUHT-er-snahyp\	noun 1. A person belonging to or characteristic of the lowest social group in a city. 2. A street urchin.
affranchise \uh-FRAN-chyz\	"verb To make or set free. [From Old French franchise, from franche, feminine of franc (free), from Latin francus (free). Franchise and enfranchise are synonyms of this word.] ""Military life did not agree with his contemplative nature, and Al-Salih eventually requested that the sultan grant him his freedom so that he could devote himself to prayer. Having been affranchised, he went back to Tabriz."" - Pascale Ghazaleh; Digging for Paradise; Al-Ahram Weekly (Cairo, Egypt); Oct 19, 2000."
prevaricate \pri-VAR-i-kayt\	"verb To avoid telling the truth by being ambiguous, evading, or misleading. [From Latin praevaricari (to straddle, to collude), from varicare (to straddle), from varus (knock-kneed, bent outwards). To prevaricate is to straddle the boundary between truth and falsehood.] ""Our presidents and their advisors, from Kennedy to Nixon and Ford, prevaricated, invented and outright lied for years about the course and casualties of the war."" - Clancy Sigal; Caught in a Fantasy Amid Subterfuge; Los Angeles Times; Jun 29, 2001."
tare \TAIR\	"noun 1. A deduction from the gross weight of a substance and its container made in allowance for the weight of the container; also: the weight of the weight of the container. 2. Counterweight [""Tare"" came to English by way of Middle French from the Old Italian term ""tara,"" which is itself from the Arabic word ""tarha,"" meaning ""that which is removed."" The first known written record of the word ""tare"" in English is found in the 1489 naval inventories of Britain's King Henry VII. The records show two barrels of gunpowder weighing, ""besides the tare,"" 500 pounds. When used of vehicles, ""tare weight"" refers to a vehicle's weight exclusive of any load. The term ""tare"" is closely tied to ""net weight,"" which is defined as ""weight excluding all tare.""]"
numismatics \noo-miz-MAT-iks, -mis-, nyoo-\	"noun The study or collection of currency: coins, notes, and sometimes similar objects, such as medals. [From Latin numisma (coin, currency), from Greek nomisma (current coin, custom), from nomos (custom). Ultimately from the Indo-European root nem- (to assign or take), which is also the source for words such as number, numb, nomad, metronome, astronomy, nemesis, and anomie. Earliest documented use: 1790. Also see notaphily.] ""Ron Paul was the middle of five boys and the only one to become fascinated with numismatics. He knew that certain pennies were worth more than their face value because few of them had been minted."" - Joel Achenbach; The Alternative; The Washington Post; Dec 15, 2011."
flexuous \FLEK-shuh-wus\	"adjective 1. Having curves, turns, or windings. 2. Lithe or fluid in action or movement. [English author Thomas Hardy was fond of the word ""flexuous"" and described his dark-haired Tess as ""the most flexuous and finely-drawn figure."" ""Flexuous"" may be a synonym of ""curvy,"" but it's not the word most likely to be chosen these days to describe a shapely woman. The botanists' use of ""flexuous"" to describe plant stems that aren't rigid is a more typical use today. But don't let that tendency deflect you from occasionally employing this ultimately quite flexible word. Stemming straight from Latin ""flectere,"" meaning ""to bend,"" it can also mean ""undulating"" or ""fluid."" It might, for example, be used of writing or music, or of something or someone that moves with a fluid sort of grace.]"
saxicolous /sak-SIK-uh-lus/ arenicolous /ar-uh-NIK-uh-luhs/	saxicolous adjective: Inhabiting or growing among rocks. arenicolous adjective: Living, growing, or burrowing in sand. [From Latin harena/arena (sand) + colere (to inhabit). Earliest documented use: 1851.] “‘Where have you disappeared to? Where have you been living?’ I asked Tariq. ... ‘Are you trying to tell me that he lives like arenicolous worms?’” - Jamal S. Jumah; The Artistic Visage of Dalia; Xlibris; 2010.
tessellate \TES-uh-leyt; adj. -uh-lit, -leyt\	verb (used with object) To form of small squares or blocks, as floors or pavements; form or arrange in a checkered or mosaic pattern. adjective Tessellated
plangent \PLAN-juhnt\	"adjective 1. Loud and resounding: plangent bells. 2. Expressing or suggesting sadness; plaintive: ""From a doorway came the plangent sounds of a guitar"" (Malcolm Lowry)."
sententia \sen-TEN-shee-uh, -shuh\ sententiae (plural) \sen-TEN-shee-ee\	noun An adage or maxim.
misandry \MIS-an-dree\	"noun Hatred of men. [From mis-, from miso- (hate) + -andry (male). The feminine counterpart of this term is misogyny, and hatred of humankind is known as misanthropy.] ""Television advertising, for example, is deeply infected by misandry. In adverts for everything from jeans to yogurt, men are portrayed as idiots."" - John Waters; A Hate That Dares Us to Breathe Its Name; Irish Times (Dublin, Ireland); Nov 25, 1997. ""Perhaps the monolithic misandry of Veronica Quilligan's Dilly should have signalled, as her facial and body language quite fail to, that the character was being set up for a narrative reversal."" - Ian Shuttleworth; Two Halves That Don't Add up to One Whole; Financial Times (London, UK); Aug 2, 2001."
natch \nach\	adverb Slang. Of course; naturally. [shortening and resp. of naturally]
gabardine \GAB-er-deen, gab-er-DEEN\	noun 1. A long, loose coat or frock for men, worn in the Middle Ages, especially by Jews. 2. Chiefly British A loose smock worn by laborers.
sallow \SAL-oh\	"adjective Of a sickly yellowish hue or complexion. verb tr. To make sallow. [Middle English salowe, from Old English salo.] ""Upstairs, a few desperately merry waiters are serving nonalcoholic drinks and cheeseburgers to sallow diners who look as if they've arrived at the end of the world ...."" - Pico Iyer, Where worlds collide: in Los Angeles International Airport, the future touches down, Harper's Magazine, Aug 1995. Synonyms Bilious, jaundiced."
casuistry \KAZH-oo-uh-stree\	"noun 1. Deceptive or excessively subtle reasoning, especially on moral issues. 2. A resolving of specific cases of conscience, duty, or conduct through interpretation of ethical principles or religious doctrine. [From Latin casus (case, fall, chance), past participle of cadere (to fall). Ultimately from the Indo-European root kad- (to fall) that is also the source of cadence, cascade, casualty, cadaver, chance, chute, accident, occident, decay, and recidivism. Earliest documented use: 1712.] ""We were once a brutally honest people, but we've become too much given to casuistry."" - Gabriel Anda; Scissors, Rock, and Paper Doll; Xlibris; 2011."
nonce \nons\	"noun The present or particular occasion. [1150–1200; ME nones, in phrase for the nones, by faulty division of for then ones for the once] ""Her tendency to discover a touch of sadness had for the nonce disappeared"" - Theodore Dreiser"
praxis \PRAK-sis\	"noun: 1. Practice, as opposed to the theory. 2. Accepted practice or custom. 3. A set of practice exercises. [From Latin praxis, from Greek praxis, from prassein/prattein (to do). Earliest documented use: before 1586.] ""His head hung lower than was its praxis."" - Mark Christopher; Monkeys Can't Swim; AuthorHouse; 2009. ""The contradiction between the declared intent and actual praxis causes a clash."" - Chikwenye Okonjo Ogunyemi; Africa Wo/Man Palava: The Nigerian Novel by Women; The University of Chicago Press; 1996."
thew \THOO\	"noun 1. Usually, thews. muscle or sinew. 2. Thews, physical strength. [""Thew"" has had a long, difficult past during which it discovered its strengths and weaknesses. In Middle English it carried a number of meanings, referring to a custom, habit, personal quality, or virtue. The word began to tire in the 16th century but was soon revitalized with a new meaning: it began to be used specifically for the quality of physical strength and later for the muscles demonstrating that quality. In time, the word buddied up with ""sinew"" in both literal and figurative turns of phrase, as in ""the thews and sinews of my body ached"" and ""their love affair was the thew and sinew of the story.""] thewless /THYOO-lis/ adjective 1. Cowardly. 2. Lacking energy. [From thew (muscle, strength), from Old English theaw (custom, usage). Earliest documented use: before 1327.] ""The devil, the heathen, the apostate will be awe-struck, thewless before our superior metal."" - Irv C. Rogers; Motoo Eetee: Shipwrecked at the Edge of the World; McBooks Press; 2002."
de jure \di JOOR-ee, day JOOR-ay, day YOO-ray, day JYOO-ray\	"adverb By right; by law. adjective Rightful. [From Latin de jure (from the law). Ultimately from the Indo-European root yewes- (law) that is also the source of jury, judge, just, injury, perjury, and conjure. The complement of de jure is de facto meaning ""in practice"".] ""Martin Luther King Jr. dedicated his life to fighting for civil rights and justice for America's black victims of de jure and de facto discrimination."" - Bill Maxwell; To Honor King, Live Up to Him; St. Petersburg Times (Florida); Jan 17, 2010."
locum \LOH-kuhm\	"noun A person filling in for another, especially for a doctor or clergyman. [From Latin locum tenens (holding the place), from locus (place) + tenere (to hold). The full form locum tenens is also used in English.] ""Health authority CEO Bruce Quigley says they're now able to offer higher rates for locums at both rural hospitals to fill vacant shifts."" - More Pay Offered to Cumberland County ER Workers; The Chronicle Herald (Halifax, Canada); Jul 27, 2009."
zaftig \ZAHF-tig\	"adjective Having a full rounded figure: pleasingly plump. [""Real women have curves,"" as a 2002 movie title proclaimed. They are pleasingly plump, full-figured, shapely, womanly, curvy, curvaceous, voluptuous, statuesque. They are, in a word, zaftig. ""Zaftig"" has been juicing up our language since the 1930s (the same decade that gave us Yiddish-derived ""futz,"" ""hoo-ha,"" ""nosh,"" and ""schmaltz,"" not to mention ""lox""). It comes from the Yiddish ""zaftik,"" which means ""juicy"" or ""succulent"" and which in turn derives from ""zaft,"" meaning ""juice"" or ""sap.""] ""The generational conflict is set off between the blossoming Ana (America Ferrera), a Mexican-American teenager who has a chance to attend Columbia University on a scholarship, and her mother, Carmen (Lupe Ontiveros), who is determined that Ana follow convention and go to work with her in a Los Angeles sweatshop. Carmen's blithe cruelty comes out of love; she's ashamed of her daughter's zaftig figure and whittles away at Ana before the entire world."" - Elvis Mitchell; Full Figured and Ready to Fight; The New York Times; Mar 22, 2002."
daft \daft, dahft\	adjective,-er, -est. 1. Senseless, stupid, or foolish. 2. Insane; crazy.
baksheesh \BAK-sheesh\	"noun A payment, such as a tip or bribe. [From Persian bakhshish, from bakhshidan, from baksh (to give).] ""A certain favoritism, even in the absence of baksheesh-pocketing headwaiters, is indispensable to restaurants that expect to maintain a steady clientele -- especially in New York, where every other big shot seems to demand the 'best' table and, instead of something fabulous to eat, a custom-baked potato."" - Thomas McNamee; The Joy of Cooking; The New York Times Book Review; Jun 23, 2002. ""About 130 officials were fired for taking baksheesh, and the volume of tariff revenue that actually reached state coffers jumped by almost 50% in two years."" - Maturing Mozambique; The Economist (London, UK); Dec 4, 1999."
laager or lager \LAH-guhr\	"noun 1. A camp, especially one protected by a circle of wagons or armored vehicles. 2. An entrenched policy or viewpoint. verb tr., intr. To enclose in a defensive encirclement. [From obsolete Afrikaans lager (camp), from Dutch or German Lager (camp). Ultimately from the Indo-European root legh- (to lie or lay) that is also the source of lie, lay, lair, fellow.] ""[The scientists] should repudiate the laager mentality and evasions of the East Anglia researchers. Instead of grudgingly yielding to Freedom of Information requests, they should publish their data and workings online wherever possible."" - Ian Katz; The Case for Climate Action; The Guardian (London, UK); Feb 8, 2010."
potlatch \POT-lach\	"noun 1. A party or get-together. 2. A ceremonial festival among American Indians of the Pacific Northwest involving feasts, lavish gift giving, dances, etc. [From Chinook Jargon, from Nootka patshatl (to give, gift).] ""'[The youth ambassadors] were coming to the biggest potlatch in the world, sharing and developing a sense of pride in who they are,' Diane Strand says."" - Shelley Fralic; World's Biggest Potlatch Changing Attitudes; Vancouver Sun (Canada); Feb 24, 2010."
lave \LAYV\	verb 1. a) Wash, bathe. b) To flow along or against. 2. Pour.
petard \puh-TAHRD\	"noun 1. A case containing an explosive to break down a door or gate or breach a wall. 2. A firework that explodes with a loud report. [Aside from historical references to siege warfare, and occasional contemporary references to fireworks, ""petard"" is almost always encountered in variations of the phrase ""hoist with one's own petard,"" meaning ""victimized or hurt by one's own scheme."" The phrase comes from Shakespeare's Hamlet: ""For 'tis the sport to have the enginer / Hoist with his own petar."" ""Hoist"" in this case is the past participle of the verb ""hoise,"" meaning ""to lift or raise,"" and ""petar(d)"" refers to an explosive device used in siege warfare. Hamlet uses the example of the engineer (the person who sets the explosive device) being blown into the air by his own device as a metaphor for those who schemed against Hamlet being undone by their own schemes. The phrase has endured, even if its literal meaning has largely been forgotten.] ""Her attempt to rub salt in the wound had backfired. She had been well and truly hoist by her own petard."" - Immodesty Blaize; Ambition; Ebury Press; 2010. ""Ned ... heard the petard exploding against the doors of the fort."" - Dudley Pope; Corsair; House of Stratus; 1987."
propitiate \pruh-PISH-ee-eyt\	"verb To make favorably inclined; appease; conciliate. [Like its synonym ""appease,"" ""propitiate"" means ""to ease the anger or disturbance of,"" but there are subtle differences between the two terms as well. ""Appease"" usually implies quieting insistent demands by making concessions, whereas ""propitiate"" tends to suggest averting the anger or malevolence of a superior being. In fact, ""propitiate"" often occurs in contexts involving deities, spirits, or other preternatural forces. You might ""appease"" your hunger, but to speak more colorfully, you could ""propitiate the gods of hunger.""] ""The fans of the hard-luck baseball team wondered openly how to propitiate the gods of fate after yet another heartbreaking defeat."""
magniloquent \mag-NIL-uh-kwunt\	"adjective Speaking in or characterized by a high-flown often bombastic style or manner [""Magnus"" means ""great"" in Latin; ""loqui"" is a Latin verb meaning ""to speak."" Combine the two and you get ""magniloquus,"" the Latin predecessor of ""magniloquent."" English speakers started using ""magniloquent"" in the 1600s -- even though we'd had its synonym ""grandiloquent"" since the 1500s. (""Grandiloquent"" comes from Latin ""grandiloquus,"" which combines ""loqui"" and ""grandis,"" another word for ""great"" in Latin.) Today, these synonyms continue to exist side by side and to be used interchangeably, though ""grandiloquent"" is the more common of the two.]"
solipsism \SOL-ip-siz-uhm\	noun 1. The view or theory that the self is all that exists or can be known to exist. 2. Self-absorption or self-centeredness. [From Latin solus (alone) + ipse (self). Earliest documented use: 1836.] “These feckless fudgewits who think the world stops when they close their eyes and only becomes real once they open them again. That kind of solipsism is part of the joy of being young, of course.” - Meet the Exiles on Vain Street; Irish Independent (Dublin); Jun 5, 2015.
irrupt \ih-RUHPT\	verb 1. To break or burst in suddenly. 2. To manifest violent activity or emotion, as a group of persons. 3. (of animals) To increase suddenly in numbers through a lessening of the number of deaths.
protean \PROH-tee-uhn, proh-TEE-]	"adjective 1. Assuming many forms: variable. 2. Able to handle many different things, as roles in a play. Versatile. [After Proteus, a sea god in Greek mythology, who could assume different forms. He got his name from Greek protos (first) as he was one of the earliest sea gods. Earliest documented use: 1594.] ""Bruce Chatwin: Such a protean character, a man of many parts. A man who loved the austere but was also flamboyant in manner."" Thor Kah Hoong; Protean Character; The Star (Petaling Jaya, Malaysia); Feb 27, 2007."
slattern \SLAT-ern\	noun 1. A slovenly, untidy woman or girl. 2. A slut; harlot.
demiurge \DEM-ee-urj\	"noun 1. Philosophy. (in the Gnostic and certain other systems) A supernatural being imagined as creating or fashioning the world in subordination to the Supreme Being, and sometimes regarded as the originator of evil. 2. (in many states of ancient Greece) A public official or magistrate. [In the Platonic school of philosophy, the Demiurge is a deity who fashions the physical world in the light of eternal ideas. In the Timaeus, Plato credits the Demiurge with taking preexisting materials of chaos and arranging them in accordance with the models of eternal forms. Nowadays the word ""demiurge"" can refer to the individual or group chiefly responsible for a creative idea, as in ""the demiurge behind the new hit TV show."" ""Demiurge"" derives via Late Latin from Greek ""dēmiourgos,"" meaning ""artisan"" or ""one with special skill."" The ""demi-"" part of the word comes from the Greek noun ""dēmos,"" meaning ""people""; the second part comes from the word for worker, ""ergon.""] ""A noisy group of video-game critics and theoreticians laments the rise of story in games. Games, in one version of this view, are best exemplified as total play, wherein the player is an immaterial demiurge and the only 'narrative' is what is anecdotally generated during play."" — From Tom Bissell's 2011 book Extra Lives: Why Video Games Matter"
carapace \Kar-uh-peys\	noun A bony or chitinous shield, test, or shell covering some or all of the dorsal part of an animal, as of a turtle.
cynosure \SAHY-nuh-shoor, sin-uh-\	"noun 1. Something that strongly attracts attention by its brilliance, interest, etc.: the cynosure of all eyes. 2. Something serving for guidance or direction. [Originally the term was applied to the constellation Ursa Minor or the North Star (Polaris) that was used in navigation. The term is derived from Latin Cynosura (Ursa Minor), from Greek kynosoura (dog's tail), ultimately from the Indo-European root kwon- (dog) that is also the source of canine, chenille (from French chenille: caterpillar, literally, little dog), cynic, kennel, canary, hound, dachshund, and corgi. And from the root ors- (buttocks) which also gave us ass, dodo, and squirrel.] ""If Bipasha became the cynosure of all eyes, Payal too hogged the limelight."" - Dancing Their Way to the Bank; Economic Times (New Delhi, India); Dec 31, 2006."
verdure \VER-jer\	"noun 1. The greenness of growing vegetation; also, such vegetation itself 2. A condition of health and vigor [On this, the Northern Hemisphere's vernal equinox, those of us who've suffered through a long, cold winter welcome the coming verdure. English speakers have had the use of the word ""verdure"" since the 14th century, when it made its way into Middle English from Anglo-French. Like the more common ""verdant,"" the word traces back to Latin ""virere,"" meaning ""to be green."" Since the early 16th century, ""verdure"" has also been used to refer to a kind of tapestry with a design based on plant forms. The ""verdure"" that English speakers sometimes encounter on menus is Italian; in that language ""verdure"" refers to green vegetables or to vegetables in general.]"
copacetic \koh-puh-SET-ik\	"adjective Very satisfactory [Theories about the origin of ""copacetic"" abound. The tap dancer Bill ""Bojangles"" Robinson believed he had coined the word as a boy in Richmond, Virginia. When patrons of his shoeshine stand would ask, ""How's everything this morning?"" he would reply, ""Oh jes' copacetic, boss; jes' copacetic."" But the word was current in Southern Black English perhaps as early as 1880, so it seems unlikely that Robinson (born in 1878) could have invented the term. Another explanation is that the word is from the Hebrew phrase ""kol be sedher,"" meaning ""everything is in order."" Possibly it was coined by Harlem blacks working in Jewish businesses. The word's popularity among Southern blacks, however, points to its originating in one of the Southern cities in which Jewish communities thrived, such as Atlanta.]"
hummock \HUM-uk\	noun 1. A rounded knoll or hillock. 2. A ridge of ice. 3. A fertile area in the southern United States and especially Florida that is usually higher than its surroundings and that is characterized by hardwood vegetation and deep humus-rich soil.
shibboleth \SHIB-uh-luth\	"noun 1. The use of a word or pronunciation that distinguishes a group of people. 2. A slogan, belief, or custom that's now considered outmoded. [The Bible's Book of Judges (12:4-6) tells the story of the Ephraimites, who, after they were routed by the Gileadite army, tried to retreat by sneaking across a ford of the Jordan River that was held by their enemy. The Gileadites, wary of the ploy, asked every soldier who tried to cross if he was an Ephraimite. When the soldier said ""no,"" he was asked to say ""shibboleth"" (which means ""stream"" in Hebrew). Gileadites pronounced the word ""shibboleth,"" but Ephramites said ""sibboleth."" Anyone who left out the initial ""sh"" was killed on the spot. When English speakers first borrowed ""shibboleth,"" they used it to mean ""test phrase,"" but it has acquired additional meanings since that time.]"
irredentist /ir-i-DEN-tist/	noun One who advocates the recovery of territory culturally or historically related to one's nation but now subject to a foreign government. [Italian irredentista, from (Italia) irredenta, unredeemed (Italy), Italian- speaking areas subject to other countries, feminine of irredento : in-, not (from Latin in-) + redento, redeemed, from Latin redemptus, past participle of redimere, to redeem.]
dentate \DEN-tayt\	"adjective Edged with toothlike projections; toothed. [Latin dentatus, from dens, dent-, tooth.] ""The percent of dentate Americans with untreated decay declines with age to age 74, then rises slightly."" - Mogelonsky, Marcia, Dentists are forever, American Demographics, 1 Aug 1996."
bruxism \BRUK-si-zehm\	noun The habitual, involuntary grinding or clenching of the teeth, usually during sleep, as from anger, tension, fear, or frustration. [From New Latin bruxis, a gnashing, from Greek brukein, to gnash.]
dentifrice \DEN-tih-fris\	noun A substance, such as a paste or powder, for cleaning the teeth. [French, from Old French, from Latin dentifricium : denti- + fricare, to rub.]
diastema \die-uh-STEE-mah\	noun, plural diastemata A gap between two adjacent teeth. [Late Latin, from Greek diastema, interval, from diiastanai, to put apart.]
euhemerism \yoo-HEE-muh-riz-uhm, -HEM-\	"noun A theory attributing the origin of the gods to the deification of historical heroes. [After Euhemerus, fourth-century B.C. Greek philosopher.] ""The Euhemerism of later scholiasts derived the name from a king Adrastos, who was said to have been the first to build a temple to Nemesis, and so the power thus worshipped was called after his name."" - Aeschylus, Prometheus Bound: Part II., Great Works of Literature, 1 Jan 1992."
Stakhanovite \sta-KA-nuh-vyt\	"noun A Soviet worker honored and rewarded for exceptional diligence in increasing production. [After Aleksei Grigorievich Stakhanov (1906-1977), Soviet miner.] ""With characteristic Stakhanovite energy, Rea has a whole new album of jazz-blues tracks, entitled The Blue Cafe, out in October."" - John Walsh, The reluctant rocker, Independent, 3 May 1997. ""Experts confirm the boomers' reports of Stakhanovite schedules."" - Walter Kiechel, III and Susan E. Kuhn, The Workaholic Generation, Fortune, 10 Apr 1989."
mansard \MAN-sard\	noun 1. A roof having two slopes on all four sides, with the lower slope almost vertical and the upper almost horizontal. 2. The upper story formed by the lower slope of a mansard roof. [French mansarde after Francois Mansart (1598-1666), French architect.]
macadam \ma-KAD-uhm\	noun Pavement made of layers of compacted broken stone, now usually bound with tar or asphalt. [After John Loudon McAdam (1756-1836), Scottish civil engineer.]
extensile \ik-STEN-sil\	adjective 1. Capable of being extended or protruded; extensible. 2. Computer Science. Of or relating to a programming language or a system that can be modified by changing or adding features.
compeer \KOM-pier, kuhm-PIER\	noun 1. A person of equal status or rank; a peer. 2. A comrade, companion, or associate. [Middle English comper, from Old French, from Latin compar, equal.]
alarum \a-LAH-ruhm\	noun A warning or an alarm, especially a call to arms. [Middle English alarom, variant of alarm, alarm.]
rusticate \RUS-ti-kayt\	verb intr. To go to or live in the country. verb tr. 1. To send to the country. 2. Chiefly British. To suspend (a student) from a university. 3. To construct (masonry) with conspicuous, often beveled points. [Latin rusticari, rusticat-, from rusticus, rustic.]
shamble \SHAM-buhl\	verb intr. To walk in an awkward, lazy, or unsteady manner, shuffling the feet. noun A shuffling gait. [Probably from obsolete shamble, awkward, ungainly, from Middle English schamil, butcher's table.]
decoct \di-KOKT\	"verb tr. 1. To extract the flavor of by boiling. 2. To make concentrated; boil down. [Middle English decocten, to boil, from Latin decoquere, decoct-, to boil down or away : de- + coquere, to boil, to cook.] ""Ning decocted the herbs, but the boy disliked the bitter liquid."" - Ha Jin, New arrival. (short story), Chicago Review, 22 Sep 1995."
distingue \dees-tang-GAY, dis-, di-STANG-gay\	adjective Distinguished in appearance, manner, or bearing. [French, past participle of distinguer, to distinguish, from Old French.]
clamant \KLAY-mant, KLAM-uhnt\	"adjective 1. Clamorous; loud. 2. Demanding attention; pressing. [Latin clamans, clamant-, present participle of clamare, to cry out.] ""Mr Buchanan has been the most clamant anti-war voice of the 1990s ..."""
corky \KAWR-kee\	adjective 1. Of or resembling cork. 2. Lively; buoyant.
querulous \KWER-uh-luhs, KWER-yuh-\	"adjective 1. Given to complaining; peevish. 2. Expressing a complaint or grievance; grumbling. [English speakers have tagged fearful whiners ""querulous"" since late medieval times. The Middle English form of the word, ""querelose,"" was an adaptation of the Latin adjective, ""querulus,"" which in turn evolved from the Latin verb ""queri,"" meaning ""to complain."" ""Queri"" is also an ancestor of the English words ""quarrel"" and ""quarrelsome,"" but it isn't an ancestor of the noun ""query"" (meaning ""question""). No need to complain that we're being coy; we're happy to let you know that ""query"" descends from the Latin verb ""quaerere,"" meaning ""to ask.""] ""`Take a look at the speeches and letters of the Founding Fathers,' he (Newt Gingrich) says. `Compare them with the querulous whining and petty grievances of so many modern columnists and academics.' But why not compare those statesmen with today's politicians?"" - Robert Pear, What would Founding Fathers say about today's political process?, Minneapolis Star Tribune, 3 Mar 1996."
percipient \per-SIP-ee-ant\	"adjective Having deep insight or understanding. noun One that perceives. [From Latin percipere (to perceive), from per- (thoroughly) + capere (to seize). Ultimately from the Indo-European root kap- (to grasp), which also gave us captive, capsule, capable, capture, cable, chassis, occupy, deceive, gaff, caitiff, and captious. Earliest documented use: 1659.] ""I am a percipient and keen observer and manage an asset class which has long-term return potential."" - Sanket Dhanorkar; Fund Manager's Pharma; The Economic Times (New Delhi, India); Mar 6, 2012."
costive \KOS-tiv\	"adjective 1. Slow to act or speak. 2. Stingy. 3. Constipated. [Via French from Latin constipare (to cram together), from com- (together) + stipare (to pack or crowd).] ""Mark Wahlberg, for example, is low-key to the point of costive."" - Anthony Lane; Nocturnes; The New Yorker; Oct 22, 2007."
rhadamanthine \rad-a-MAN-thin\	"adjective Strictly and uncompromisingly just. [From Rhadamanthus, in Greek Mythology a son of Zeus and Europa who, in reward for his exemplary sense of justice, was made a judge of the underworld after his death.] ""Antoine Christophe Saliceti returned to his home island in the role of inflexible ideologue ... dispensing rhadamanthine justice."" Steven Englund; Napoleon: A Political Life; Scribner; 2003."
Cimmerian \si-MIR-ee-uhn\	"adjective Very dark or gloomy. [After Cimmerians, a mythical people described in Homer's Odyssey, who lived in perpetual darkness at the entrance of Hades. The historical Cimmerians, who lived in Crimea, were unrelated. Earliest documented use: 1594.] USAGE: ""All along the beach they had travelled on the empty bus, watching as lightning slashed the brooding, Cimmerian sky."" - Anita Rau Badami; The Hero's Walk; Algonquin Books; 2001."
doily \DOI-lee\	noun 1. A small ornamental mat, usually of lace or linen. 2. A small table napkin. [After Doily or Doyly, 18th-century London draper.]
onomatopoeia \on-uh-mat-uh-PEE-uh\	"noun The formation or use of words such as buzz or murmur that imitate the sounds associated with the objects or actions they refer to. [Late Latin, from Greek onomatopoiia, from onomatopoios, coiner of names : onoma, onomat-, name + poiein, to make.] ""I couldn't say the `f' word for a while. I would explain the situation and not say the word. It is one of those words that sounds like what it is. I think that is called onomatopoeia. Fired is a harsh cutting word."" - Linney, Barbara J., Rising from the ashes: the aftermath of being fired. Physician Executive, 1 Mar 1996."
skulk \skulk\	"verb intr. 1. To hide, evade, or move stealthily. noun 1. Someone who lies in hiding, evades, or lurks. 2. A pack of foxes. [From Middle English skulken, of Scandinavian origin.] ""Heaven's Acre Wildlife Center has a gaggle of geese, a skulk of foxes, an over-abundance of raccoons and a singular problem - it violates city zoning."" - Gary Gerhardt; Wildlife Rehab Center Runs Into the Teeth of Arvada's Zoning Rules; Rocky Mountain News (Denver, Colorado); Aug 6, 1998."
skein \skayn\	"noun 1. A length of yarn wound around a reel. 2. A flock of geese, ducks, or other similar birds in flight. 3. Something suggesting complex twists and tangles. [From Middle English skeyine, from Old French escaigne. Notes: When in flight, geese are called a skein; when not in flight, a gaggle; and when flying in a V formation, they are referred to as a wedge. Ducks take a number of terms too: while in water, they're a paddling.] ""The article, described as a tale of 'bank fraud, oil trading, and bombs,' prompted Norman to follow a tangled skein of connections to a second, much broader, story."" - Linda Grant; Newstrends: A Story You Won't Read in Forbes; Fortune (New York); Oct 2, 1995. ""Arrowhead skeins of geese fly northward and land at Walker Bay to breed."" - Bruce Thorson; Boom and Bus; Canadian Geographic (Ottawa); Mar 13, 1998."
covey \KUV-ee\	"noun 1. A small flock of birds such as partridge or quail. 2. A group or a set. [From Middle English, from Old French covee (brood), feminine past participle of cover (to incubate, hatch), from Latin cubare (to lie down). Some other words in this brood that all came from the same Latin root are cubicle, incubate, couvade, and concubine.] ""A black-tailed jackrabbit walks slowly down the wash, ambling tall-eared amid a covey of Gambel's quail, like a cowboy driving his herd."" - Steve Howe; The Kingdom of the Cactus; Backpacker (Emmaus, Pennsylvania); Sep 1, 1995."
sounder \SOUN-duhr\	noun 1. A person or thing that makes sound. 2. A group of wild boars.
esemplastic \es-em-PLAS-tik\	"adjective Shaping or having the power to shape disparate things into a unified whole. [Unusual and new-coined words are, doubtless, an evil; but vagueness, confusion, and imperfect conveyance of our thoughts, are a far greater,"" wrote English poet Samuel Taylor Coleridge in Biographia Literaria, 1817. True to form, in that same work, he assembled ""esemplastic"" by melding the Greek phrase ""es hen,"" meaning ""into one,"" with ""plastic"" to fulfill his need for a word that accurately described the imagination's ability to shape disparate experiences into a unified whole (e.g., the poet's imaginative ability to communicate a variety of images, sensations, emotions, and experiences in the unifying framework of a poem). The verb ""intensify"" was another word that Coleridge was compelled to mint while writing Biographia. Coinages found in his other writings include ""clerisy"" and ""psychosomatic,"" among others.]"
pullulate \PUL-yuh-layt\	"verb 1. To sprout or breed. 2. To swarm or teem. 3. To increase rapidly. [To remember the history of ""pullulate,"" think chickens. This may sound like odd advice, but it makes sense if you know that ""pullulate"" traces ultimately to the Latin noun ""pullus,"" which means not only ""sprout,"" but also ""young of an animal"" and, specifically, ""chick."" ""Pullus"" is also an ancestor of ""pullet"" (""young hen""), ""poult"" (meaning ""young fowl"" and especially ""young turkey""), and even ""poultry"" (""domesticated fowl""). At first ""pullulate"" referred to sprouting, budding, and breeding around the farm; only later did it gain its ""swarm"" sense.] “You know less than you think you do. The constant reinforcement of that sorry idea has become a drumbeat under parenting, as advice books of every kind pullulate like toadstools after a storm.” - Andrew Solomon; Go Play Outside; The New York Times; Dec 14, 2014."
bread and circuses	noun Things intended to keep people happy and to divert their attention from the problems. [Translation of Latin term panis et circenses, from panis (bread) + et (and), circenses (circuses). The term originated in the satires of Roman poet Juvenal (c. 60-140). Circus refers to the circus games, such as chariot races, held in the Roman times. The term has been loan translated into many other languages. In Spanish, for example, it is pan y toros (bread and bullfights).]
salmagundi \sal-muh-GUHN-dee\	"noun 1. A heterogeneous mixture. 2. A mixed salad of various ingredients, such as meat, eggs, anchovies, onions, oil, vinegar, etc. [From French salmagondis (originally ""seasoned salted meats""), probably from salemine (salted food) + condir (to season).]"
Peyton Place	A place whose inhabitants have sordid secrets.
weltanschauung \VELT-ahn-shou-oong\	"noun World view; philosophy of life; a framework through which to interpret the world. [From German Weltanschauung (world view), from Welt (world) + Anschauung (perception).] ""Gwyneth Paltrow summed up her weltanschauung thus: 'My life is good because I am not passive about it.'"" - Richard Dorment; Gwyneth Paltrow Feels Good -- And So Can You; Esquire (New York); Sep 16, 2009."
zeitgeist \TSYT-gyst\	"noun The defining spirit of a particular period: the general cultural, political, intellectual, and moral climate of an era. [From German Zeitgeist (spirit of the time), from Zeit (time) + Geist (spirit).] ""Once again Lionel Shriver has stomped into the middle of a pressing national debate with a great ordeal of a novel So Much For That that's impossible to ignore. ... If Jodi Picoult has her finger on the zeitgeist, Shriver has her hands around its throat."" - Ron Charles; So Much For That; The Washington Post; Mar 17, 2010."
sward \SWORD\	"noun 1. A portion of ground covered with grass. 2. The grassy surface of land. [From Old English sweard (skin, rind).] ""While one man's six might bring cheers from the crowd, it brings fear for Mike Robins and his neighbours. They live next to the green sward of Alphington Cricket Club."" - Neighbours 'Under Siege' From Cricket Club's Hard And High Balls; Express & Echo (Exeter, UK); Aug 5, 2010."
campanile \kam-puh-NEE-lee, -NEEL\	noun A bell tower, especially one freestanding from the body of a church.
revanche \ruh-VANCH\	noun The policy of a state intent on regaining areas of its original territory that have been lost to other states as a result of war, a treaty signed under duress, etc.
Baader-Meinhof Phenomenon	A common name for a form of synchronicity where one happens upon an obscure piece of information and soon afterwards encounters the same subject again.
surfeit \SUR-fit\	"noun 1. An overabundant supply; excess. 2. An intemperate or immoderate indulgence in something (as food or drink). 3. Disgust caused by excess. [There is an abundance—you could almost say a surfeit—of English words that derive from the Latin ""facere,"" meaning ""to do."" The connection to ""facere"" is fairly obvious for words spelled with ""fic,"" ""fac,"" or ""fec,"" such as ""sacrifice,"" ""benefaction,"" and ""infect."" For words like ""stupefy"" (a modification of Latin ""stupefacere"") and ""hacienda"" (originally, in Old Spanish and Latin, ""facienda"") the ""facere"" factor is not so apparent. As for ""surfeit,"" the ""c"" was dropped along the path that led from Latin through Anglo-French, where ""facere"" became ""faire"" and ""sur-"" was added to make ""surfaire,"" meaning ""to overdo."" The Anglo-French noun ""surfet"" (""excess"") entered Middle English and went through a number of spellings before settling on ""surfeit.""] ""Every day, we're bombarded by options; the surfeit of decisions we don't really need to make can be overwhelming."" — From a restaurant review by Tania Ballantine in Time Out, June 14, 2012"
vale \veyl\	noun 1. A valley. 2. The world, or mortal or earthly life: this vale of tears.
concertina \kon-ser-TEE-nuh\	noun 1. 2. Concertina wire. verb 3. To cause to fold or collapse in the manner of a concertina. adjective 4. Of, pertaining to, or resembling a concertina: concertina pleats.
perquisite \PUR-kwuh-zit\	noun 'Perk' may be a shortening of this noun 1. An incidental payment, benefit, privilege, or advantage over and above regular income, salary, or wages: Among the president's perquisites were free use of a company car and paid membership in a country club. 2. A gratuity or tip. 3. Something demanded or due as a particular privilege: homage that was once the perquisite of royalty.
polysemous	"noun Having multiple meanings. [From Latin polysemus, from Greek polysemos, from poly- (many) + sema (sign). Earliest documented use: 1884.] ""The polysemous ancient Greek word pharmakon strangely captures all of these apparently contradictory senses and meanings."" - Stephen Morris; Revealing the Pharmacon; Catholic New Times; Nov 21, 2004. polysemic adjective Having more than one meaning; having multiple meanings; also called polysemous."
waif \WAYF\	"noun 1. (a) A piece of property found (as washed up by the sea) but unclaimed (b) Stolen goods thrown away by a thief in flight. 2. (a) Something found without an owner and especially by chance (b) A stray person or animal; especially, a homeless child. [Today's ""waif"" came from Anglo-French ""waif,"" meaning ""stray"" or ""unclaimed,"" and, further back, probably from a Scandinavian ancestor. It entered English in the 14th century and was followed approximately a century later by another ""waif,"" this one meaning ""a pennant or flag used to signal or to show wind direction,"" which English speakers derived independently, possibly from the same Scandinavian word. In its earliest uses, today's word referred to a piece of unclaimed property. It eventually developed other extended meanings before acquiring the ""stray person or animal"" sense. The skinny appearance typical of waifs resulted in the word being applied to people with skinny body types, beginning in the 1980s, though this sense hasn't yet found a home on the pages of our dictionaries.]"
quiescence \kwee-ES-uhns, kwi-\	"noun A state of rest, inactivity, or quietness. [From Latin quiescere (to become quiet), from quies (quiet).] ""The Copenhagen debacle could lead to a period of quiescence in which not much is done to pursue climate-change policy."" - Anthony Giddens; Start the World, We Want to Get On; NewStatesman (London, UK); Feb 8, 2010."
limen \LY-muhn\	"noun A threshold of response: point at which a stimulus is of sufficient intensity to generate a response. [From Latin limen (threshold).] ""Such to the dead might appear the world of living -- charged with information, with meaning, yet somehow always just, terribly, beyond that fateful limen where any lamp of comprehension might beam forth."" - Thomas Pynchon; Against the Day; Penguin Press; 2006."
opprobrium \uh-PROH-bree-uhm\	noun 1. Strong criticism. 2. Public disgrace [From Latin opprobrium (reproach), from ob- (against) + probrum (infamy, reproach). Ultimately from the Indo-European root bher- (to carry), which also gave us bear, birth, barrow, burden, fertile, transfer, offer, suffer, euphoria, and metaphor. Earliest documented use: 1656.] “Most countries have armies, but in Pakistan the army has a country. ... The army’s record is not one to be proud of. Wars launched against India in 1947, 1965, and 1999, won little or nothing beyond international opprobrium.” - Nosebags; The Economist (London, UK); Sep 20, 2014.
approbation \ap-ruh-BEY-shuhn\	"noun 1. Approval; commendation. 2. Official approval or sanction. [From Latin approbation, from ap- + probatus, from probare (to test the goodness of).] ""I wrote for their Amendment, and not their Approbation."" - Jonathan Swift, Gulliver's Travels, 1726."
cap-a-pie \kap-uh-PEE\	"adverb From head to foot. [Think of a medieval knight riding off to battle completely encased (from head to foot, as it were) in armor. Knights thus outfitted were said to be ""armed cap-a-pie."" The term ""cap-a-pie,"" which has been used in English since at least the 16th century, descends from the Middle French phrase ""de cap a pe,"" meaning ""from head to foot."" Nowadays, it is generally extended to more figurative armor, as in ""armed cap-a-pie against criticism."" ""Cap-a-pie"" has also been credited with parenting another English phrase. Some people think the expression ""apple-pie order,"" meaning ""perfect order,"" may have originated as a corruption of ""cap-a-pie order."" The evidence for that theory is far from orderly, however, and it must be regarded as speculative.]"
frowsy \FROW-zee\	"adjective 1. Musty, stale. 2. Having a slovenly or uncared-for appearance. [The exact origins of this approximately 330-year-old word may be lost in some frowsy, old book somewhere, but some etymologists have speculated that ""frowsy"" (also spelled ""frowzy"") shares a common ancestor with the younger, chiefly British word ""frowsty,"" a synonym of ""frowsy"" in both its senses. That ancestor could be the Old French word ""frouste,"" meaning ""ruinous"" or ""decayed,"" or the now mostly obsolete English word ""frough"" or ""frow,"" meaning ""brittle"" or ""fragile."" The English dramatist Thomas Otway is the first person (as far as we know) to have used ""frowsy"" in print. In his comedy ""The Souldier's Fortune,"" published in 1681, the character Beau refers to another character as ""a frouzy Fellmonger.""]"
vanity fair	noun A place characterized by frivolity and ostentation. [After Vanity Fair, a fair that lasted all year long in the town of Vanity, in the novel Pilgrim's Progress by writer and preacher John Bunyan (1628-1688). In the fair were traded houses, honors, titles, kingdoms, pleasures, and much more -- sounds like an early version of eBay.]
maffick \MAF-ik\	"verb intr. To celebrate boisterously. [""Maffick"" is an alteration of Mafeking Night, the British celebration of the lifting of the siege of a British military outpost during the South African War at the town of Mafikeng (also spelled Mafeking) on May 17, 1900. The South African War was fought between the British and the Afrikaners, who were Dutch and Huguenot settlers originally called Boers, over the right to govern frontier territories. Though the war did not end until 1902, the lifting of the siege of Mafikeng was a significant victory for the British because they held out against a larger Afrikaner force for 217 days until reinforcements could arrive. The rejoicing in British cities on news of the rescue produced ""maffick,"" a word that was popular for a while, especially in journalistic writing, but is now relatively uncommon.] ""Colin Milburn had a glazed look of stupefaction in his unseeing eyes and was completely oblivious to the mafficking going all around him in the wake of England's recently completed Test victory over Australia."" - Frank Tyson; Driven by Natural Gifts; Sportstar (Chennai, India); Jul 4, 2009. ""Last year, about 300 people who like comics showed up ... It was a successful day of mingling, marketing, and mafficking."" - Wayne Alan Brenner; Giant-Sized Annual; The Austin Chronicle (Texas); Mar 3, 2006."
Babylon	"noun A place of great luxury and extravagance, usually accompanied with vice and corruption. [After Babylon, an ancient city of southwestern Asia, on the Euphrates River. It was the capital of Babylonia and known for its opulence and culture. It was the site of Hanging Gardens, one of the Seven Wonders of the Ancient World.] ""Tsuyoshi Morimoto said that when the economic crisis hit the international market, many big companies turned to Iraq in hopes that it would save them. 'Big companies talked a lot about Iraq and paid a huge amount of attention to it. It is just like we suddenly built a Babylon, and now the Babylon is collapsing.'"" - Qassim Khidhir; ""Don't Expect Too Much From Iraq""; Kurdish Globe (Arbil, Kurdistan); Jan 16, 2010."
Munich	noun A shortsighted or dishonorable appeasement. [After Munich, Germany, the site of a pact signed by Great Britain, France, Italy, and Germany on Sep 29, 1938 that permitted annexation of Czechoslovakia's Sudetenland by Nazi Germany. WWII began a year later; Sudetenland was restored to Czechoslovakia after the war. The name Munich is an exonym (a name used by outsiders). The local name (endonym) for Munich is München, derived from Mönch (monk) as the city was founded by Benedictine monks in 1158.]
distaff \DIS-taf\	"noun 1. A staff for holding flax, wool, etc. for spinning. 2. Women considered collectively. 3. A woman's work or domain. adjective 4. Sometimes Offensive. Of or relating to woman. [From Old English dis- (bunch of flax) + staef (stick). A distaff is a staff with a cleft for holding wool, flax, etc. from which thread is drawn while being spun by hand. In olden times, spinning was considered a woman's work, so distaff figuratively referred to women. Distaff side (also spindle side) refers to the female side of a family. The corresponding male equivalent of the term is spear side (also sword side). ] ""Volvo's gender politics are distinctly distaff, with safety and familial obligation easily trumping the sorts of values cherished by the aroused arrows of the world."" - Dan Neil; Herr Doktor, Your Ride is Here; Los Angeles Times; Mar 3, 2004."
Old Man of the Sea	noun A tiresome burden, especially a person, difficult to free oneself from. [After Old Man of the Sea, the sea-god, who forced Sinbad to carry him on his shoulders and refused to dismount. In this story from The Arabian Nights, Sinbad the Sailor eventually released himself from his burden by getting the Old Man drunk. Also see albatross.]
Pygmalionism \pig-MAY-lee-uh-niz-uhm\	noun 1. The state of being in love with an object of one's own making. 2. The condition of loving an inanimate object such as a statue or image. [In Greek mythology, Pygmalion was the king of Cyprus who carved a female figure in ivory so realistic and beautiful that he fell in love with her. The goddess Aphrodite took pity on him and responded by bringing the statue to life as Galatea. Pygmalion married her.]
alacrity \uh-LAK-ruh-tee\	"noun 1. Cheerful willingness; eagerness. 2. Speed or quickness; celerity. [""I have not that alacrity of spirit / Nor cheer of mind that I was wont to have,"" says Shakespeare’s King Richard III in the play that bears his name. When Shakespeare penned those words some 400 years ago, ""alacrity"" was less than a hundred years old. Our English word derives from the Latin word ""alacer,"" which means ""lively."" It denotes physical quickness coupled with eagerness or enthusiasm. Are there any other words in English from Latin ""alacer""? Yes -- ""allegro,"" which is used as a direction in music with the meaning ""at a brisk lively tempo."" It came to us via Italian (where it can mean ""merry"") and is assumed to be ultimately from ""alacer.""] ""Snider was approved by the museum's board with an alacrity that borders on the suspicious, though time was of the essence: Weyl had already left."" - Meir Ronnen, The Man Who Fell to Earth, Jerusalem Post, 13 Sep 1996."
Achates \uh-KAY-teez\	"noun A trusty friend or companion. [After Achates, the faithful companion and friend of Aeneas, in the epic poem Aeneid by the Roman poet Vergil (70-19 BCE). In the story, Achates is called fidus Achates (faithful Achates) and he accompanies Aeneas everywhere in his adventures.] ""I was baffled by the lack of reference to the sleuth of Baker Street and his trusty Achates."" John Banville; Bloomsday, Bloody Bloomsday; The New York Times; Jun 13, 2004."
cathect \kuh-THEKT\	"verb tr. To invest mental or emotional energy in an idea, object, or person. [Back-formation from Greek kathexis (the investment of emotional energy in something). Ultimately from the Indo-European root segh- (to hold) that is also the source of words such as victory (to hold in a battle), hectic, scheme, and scholar.] ""Mortimer divorced Jane Goodall's mother, Vanne, in 1950, consigning Jane to the fate of so many children who cathect with the animal kingdom to compensate for missing parents."""
swale \sweyl\	noun Chiefly Northeastern U.S. 1. A low place in a tract of land, usually moister and often having ranker vegetation than the adjacent higher land. 2. A valleylike intersection of two slopes in a piece of land.
prestidigitation \pres-ti-dij-i-tey-shuhn\	"noun 1. A sleight of hand; legerdemain. 2. Deceitfulness, trickery. [From French prestidigitation (conjuring), from preste (nimble) + Latin digitus (finger).] ""It is, of course, a nonsense number, a statistical prestidigitation."" - Polly Toynbee; Is There Pensions Apartheid?; The Guardian (London, UK); Jul 4, 2009."
sordor	noun Filth; dregs; refuse.
cerebrate \SER-uh-brayt\	"verb tr., intr. To use the mind: to think, reason. [Back-formation from cerebration (act of thinking), from cerebrum (brain). Ultimately from the Indo-European root ker- (horn or head) that is also the source of words such as unicorn, horn, hornet, rhinoceros, reindeer, migraine, carrot, carat, and Hindi sirdar (leader, from Persian sar: head).] ""Since Galatea, Richard Powers has been cerebrating more than he's been feeling, but with his latest book, as if in wild overcompensation, he has led with his heart and entirely lost his head."" - Thomas Mallon; Going to Extremes; The Atlantic (Boston); Jan/Feb 2003."
callithump \KAL-uh-thump\	"noun 1. A noisy, boisterous celebration or parade. 2. A mock serenade with pots, pans, kettles, etc., given for a newly married couple. Also known as charivari or shivaree. [Back-formation from callithumpian, alteration of English dialect word gallithumpian (disturber of order at Parliamentary elections in 18th century).] ""'Our clothes,' Bono said, 'got somewhat fusty in the rebels' little New Year's callithump."" - M.T. Anderson; The Astonishing Life of Octavian Nothing; Candlewick Press; 2008."
poltroon \pol-TROON\	noun An utter coward. [From French poltron (coward), from Italian poltrone (lazy person), from Latin pullus (young animal). Ultimately from the Indo-European root pau- (few, little), which is also the source of few, foal, filly, pony, poor, pauper, poco, and catchpole. Earliest documented use: 1529.] “Against this backdrop, Bertuccelli offers a derisive portrait of officialdom. Administrators and doctors come across as poltroons.” - Richard Duckett; ‘Since Otar Left’ is Slow But Intriguing; Telegram & Gazette (Worcester, Massachusetts); Dec 9, 2004.
nosocomial \nah-suh-KOH-mee-ul\	"adjective Acquired or occurring in a hospital [""Nosocomial"" is a word that usually occurs in formal medical contexts; specifically, in reference to hospital-acquired sickness. We hope you never encounter ""nosocomial"" as part of your own medical diagnosis, but if you do, you might want to remember that the term descends from ""nosocomium,"" the Late Latin word for ""hospital."" ""Nosocomium"" in turn traces to the Greek ""nosos,"" meaning ""disease."" That root has given English other words as well, including ""zoonosis"" (""a disease communicable from animals to humans under natural conditions"") and ""nosology"" (""a classification or list of diseases"" or ""a branch of medical science that deals with classification of diseases"").]"
scarper \SKAHR-puhr\	"verb intr. To flee, especially without paying one's bills. [The term is a Briticism and its origin isn't confirmed. It's probably from Italian scappare (to escape), influenced by Cockney rhyming slang Scapa Flow, to go. Scapa Flow is an area of water off the northern coast of Scotland, in the Orkney Islands. It was the main British naval base during WW I & II, known for the scuttling of the German fleet.] ""I am indebted to the British welfare state; the very one that Mr Cameron would like to replace with charity handouts. When my life hit rock bottom, that safety net, threadbare though it had become under John Major's Government, was there to break the fall. I cannot help feeling, therefore, that it would have been contemptible to scarper for the West Indies at the first sniff of a seven-figure royalty cheque. This, if you like, is my notion of patriotism."" - J.K. Rowling; The Single Mother's Manifesto; The Times (London, UK); Apr 14, 2010."
fructuous \FRUK-chuh-wus\	"adjective Fruitful. [In Latin the word ""fructus"" means both ""fruit"" and ""enjoyment"" or ""use."" A rich crop of English derivatives grew from that root, including ""fructuous,"" ""fructose"" (a sugar found in fruits), ""fruition"" (""the state of bearing fruit""), ""usufruct"" (""the right to use or enjoy something""), and even ""fruit"" itself. ""Fructuous"" comes from the Middle French adjective ""fructueux"" and the Latin adjective ""fructuosus,"" both ultimately derived from ""fructus.""] “Earlier this month Yemen made international headlines, this time not for its fructuous progress toward building democratic state institutions but rather for a more somber reason, the scheduled execution of a man, who, at the time of his crime was a juvenile.” - Death Penalty; Yemen Post (Sana’a); Mar 16, 2013."
vellicate \VEL-i-kayt\	"verb tr., intr. 1. To twitch or to cause to twitch. 2. To pluck, nip, irritate, etc. [From Latin vellicare, frequentative of vellere (to pull, pluck, or twitch).The great lexicographer Samuel Johnson used this word in one of his definitions ""Cough: A convulsion of the lungs, vellicated by some sharp serosity"" and broke one of the premier commandments of dictionary making: don't define a word using a harder word (serosity refers to serum: watery fluid in an animal body).] ""I have seen old folk flung to the ground by these paroxysmal and vellicating vehicles."" - Paul Johnson; And Another Thing; The Spectator (London, UK); Jun 25, 2005."
Promethean \pruh-MEE-thee-un\	"adjective Boldly creative; defiant; audacious. noun A person who is boldly creative or defiantly original. [After Prometheus, a Titan in Greek mythology. He made man from clay, stole fire from Zeus by trickery, and gave it to humans. For his crime he was chained to a rock and an eagle devoured his liver to have it grow again to be eaten again the next day. The name means forethinker, from Greek pro- (before) + manthanein (to learn). Earliest documented use: 1594.] ""A Promethean impulse lives on in the financial markets, where quantitative investors hubristically strive to invent and speculate beyond their capacity to understand."" - Ben Wright; Fear, Frankenstein and the Rise of the Machines; Financial News (London, UK); Oct 10, 2011. [As some versions of the story go in Greek mythology, Prometheus (one of the Titan giants) modeled humans from clay and then taught them agriculture and all the arts of civilization. He also stole fire from the gods and gave it to humans. So inventive was he that anything that bears the stamp of creativity and originality can still be called ""Promethean."" Zeus, however, had wanted the human race to perish, so Prometheus' actions were also disobedient. Hence ""Promethean"" can also mean defiant of authority or limits. As punishment for his disobedience, Zeus chained Prometheus to a rock where an eagle daily tore at his liver. Thus, any suffering on a grand scale can also be called Promethean -- though this sense is not as common as the others.]"
derrick \DAIR-ik\	"noun 1. A hoisting apparatus employing a tackle rigged at the end of a beam 2. A framework or tower over a deep drill hole (as of an oil well) for supporting boring tackle or for hoisting and lowering [During the reign of Queen Elizabeth I, London was the home of a notorious executioner named Derick. Among those he beheaded was the Earl of Essex, Robert Devereux, who according to a street ballad of the time had once saved the life of the ungrateful executioner. While members of the nobility were accorded the courtesy of beheading, it was the lot of commoners to be hanged, and those sent to face the rope at the hands of the executioner Derick nicknamed the gallows at Tyburn after him. Throughout the 17th century, ""derick"" was used as a name for both hangman and gallows. After the days of public hangings, the word ""derrick"" was adopted as a name for a number of less ominous frameworks or towers.] ""Here, the treeless Arctic landscape is dotted with oil derricks, all of them surrounded by filthy black pools, many with wasteful gas flares burning furiously at ground level, covering the sites with the sooty residue of their squandered energy."" - Conoco Working Hard to Harvest Russian Oil, Weekend Edition - Saturday (NPR), 26 Nov 1994."
yellow-dog \yel-oh-DAWG\	"adjective 1. Mean, contemptible. 2. Anti-union. [In the 19th century, the noun ""yellow dog"" developed a derogatory sense, meaning a low, despicable person. This usage probably came about from the traditional association of the color yellow with cowardice. Just before the turn of the century, ""yellow-dog"" started to be used by writers who were derogatorily describing organizations that expressed opposition to trade unions. The popularized term ""yellow-dog contract"" referred to an agreement made by an employer and employee in which the employee agrees not to join a labor union during the time he or she is employed. While such contracts proliferated in the 1920s, they were later made unenforceable in U.S. federal courts under the Norris-LaGuardia Act (1932).]"
Morton's fork \MOR-tuhns fork\	noun A situation involving choice between two equally undesirable outcomes. [After John Morton (c. 1420-1500), archbishop of Canterbury, who was tax collector for the English King Henry VII. To him is attributed Morton's fork, a neat argument for collecting taxes from everyone: those living in luxury obviously had money to spare and those living frugally must have accumulated savings to be able to pay.]
amerce \uh-MERSS\	"verb To punish by a fine whose amount is fixed by the court; broadly, punish. [If you break the law, you could find yourself ""at the mercy"" of the court. As you await your punishment (hoping that the judge will in fact be merciful), you may want to ponder the history of ""amerce."" It begins with the Old French phrase ""a merci,"" meaning ""at (one's) mercy,"" which in turn gave rise to the Anglo-French verb ""amercier"" (same meaning as ""amerce""). Middle English speakers adopted the French word as ""amercien,"" which was later modernized to ""amerce."" In addition to the legal use, ""amerce"" can also be used in a more general sense for the infliction of any sort of punishment, monetary or otherwise.]"
defalcate \di-FAL-kayt\	"verb intr. To misuse funds; to embezzle. [""The tea table shall be set forth every morning with its customary bill of fare, and without any manner of defalcation."" No reference to embezzlement there! This line, from a 1712 issue of Spectator magazine, is an example of the earliest, and now archaic, sense of ""defalcation,"" which is simply defined as ""curtailment."" ""Defalcation"" is ultimately from the Latin word ""falx,"" meaning ""sickle"" (a tool for cutting), and it has been a part of English since the 1400s. It was used early on of monetary cutbacks (as in ""a defalcation in their wages""), and by the 1600s it was used of most any sort of financial reversal (as in ""a defalcation of public revenues""). Not till the mid-1800s, however, did ""defalcation"" refer to breaches of trust that cause a financial loss, or, specifically, to embezzlement.] ""Prakash hit upon a more daring method to defalcate the company."" - Samsung Official Dupes Company of Crores; The Economic Times (New Delhi, India); Dec 2, 2005."
lily-livered \LILL-ee-LIV-erd\	"adjective Lacking courage, cowardly. [The basis of the word ""lily-livered"" lies in an old belief. Years ago, people thought that health and temperament were the products of a balance or imbalance of four bodily fluids, or humors: blood, phlegm, black bile, and yellow bile. It was believed that a deficiency of yellow bile, or choler, the humor that governed anger, spirit, and courage, would leave a person's liver colorless or white. Someone with this deficiency, and so white-livered, would be spiritless and a coward. ""Lily-livered"" and ""white-livered"" have been used synonymously since the 16th century, but ""lily-livered"" is now the more common expression, probably because of its alliteration. In earlier times, the liver was considered to be the seat of courage. Hence, lacking blood, a white liver, indicated lack of courage. Earliest documented use: 1616.] ""A story of twins -- one bold and the other a lily-livered cop."" - Malathi Rangarajan; Brothers and the Baddies; The Hindu (Chennai, India); Sep 25, 2012."
jactitation \jak-ti-TAY-shun\	"noun 1. A false boast or claim that is intended to harm someone, especially a malicious claim by a person that he or she is married to a particular person. 2. Involuntary tossing and twitching of the body and limbs. [From Latin jactitation (tossing, false declaration), past participle of jactitare (to throw out publicly, to boast), frequentative of jactare (to throw about), frequentative of jacere (to throw).] ""Film actress Meera has filed a suit for jactitation of marriage against her alleged husband Attique Ur Rehman, seeking court directions to stop him from claiming her as his legal wife."" - Meera Files for Marriage Jactitation; The Pak Banker (Pakistan); Feb 10, 2010."
vibrissa \vye-BRISS-uh\	"noun 1. One of the stiff hairs that are located especially about the nostrils or on other parts of the face in many mammals and that often serve as tactile organs. 2. One of the bristly feathers near the mouth of many and especially insectivorous birds that may help to prevent the escape of insects. [The whiskers of a cat qualify as vibrissae (that’s the plural of ""vibrissa""), as do the hairlike feathers around the bill of some birds -- especially the insect-feeding kind. And when scientists first used ""vibrissa"" in the late 17th century, they used the word to refer specifically to the hairs inside the human nostril. Science got this word, as it has many others, from Latin. ""Vibrissa"" comes from ""vibrare,"" which means all of the following: ""to brandish,"" ""to wave,"" ""to rock,"" and ""to propel suddenly."" Other ""vibrare"" descendents in English include ""vibrate,"" ""vibrato,"" and ""veer.""]"
orison \AWR-uh-zuhn\	"noun A prayer. [Via French from Latin oration (speech, prayer), from orare (to speak, pray), from os (mouth).] ""David Carlin's brilliant title, Our Father Who Wasn't There, mingles orison and lament. It is the apparent opening of a prayer for an absent or lost father."" - A Son Searches for the Father Who Wasn't There; The Canberra Times (Australia); Feb 6, 2010."
qui vive \kee-VEEV\	"noun Alert, lookout [When a sentinel guarding a French castle in days of yore cried, ""Qui vive?"" your life depended upon your answer -- the right one was usually something like ""Long live the king!"" The question the sentinel was asking was ""Long live who?"" but the act of calling out apparently impressed English listeners more than the meaning of the phrase, because when they adopted it in the early 1700s they used ""qui vive"" to mean ""alert."" Nowadays, the term is most often used in the phrase ""on the qui vive,"" meaning ""on the lookout.""]"
McKenzie \muh-KEN-zee\	"noun Someone who attends a court trial as an adviser to one of the parties. This person works not as a legal representative, but as an informal adviser. Also known as a ""McKenzie friend"". [The term arose from the 1970 divorce case McKenzie v. McKenzie in the UK. The man in this case didn't have a lawyer. An Australian barrister, Ian Hanger, wanted to help, but could not as he was not qualified to practise in the UK. The man represented himself; Hanger offered to sit with him and provide advice as a friend, but he was denied this by the court. The man lost the case, and this denial became the basis for appeal which affirmed the position that a litigant can, in fact, have someone attend the trial to help in a non-professional capacity. Given the role of the barrister Hanger, a better choice of coinage for this word would have been Hanger, instead of McKenzie.]"
nidifugous \nye-DIFF-yuh-gus\	"adjective Leaving the nest soon after hatching. [""Nidifugous"" hatched from the Latin words ""nidus,"" meaning ""nest,"" and ""fugere,"" meaning ""to flee."" Its contrasting word ""nidicolous,"" meaning ""reared for a time in a nest,"" combines ""nidus"" with the English combining form ""-colous"" (""living or growing in or on""). Another relevant term is ""precocial."" A precocial bird is capable of a high degree of independent activity as soon as it emerges from the egg. While all nidifugous birds are also necessarily precocial, some nidicolous birds are also precocial -- that is, they are capable of leaving the nest soon after hatching, but instead they stick around. Other nidicolous birds are ""altricial,"" which is to say they are hatched in a very immature and helpless condition and require care for some time.]"
orrery \OR-uh-ree\	noun A mechanical model of the solar system that represents the relative motions of the planets around the sun. [After Charles Boyle, 4th Earl of Orrery (1676-1731), who was given one of those models by John Rowley, a London instrument-maker. They were invented by George Graham c. 1700. The device would have been better named either after its inventor, Graham, or its maker, Rowley.]
Buridan's ass \byoo-RUHD-uhnz ass\	"noun A situation demonstrating the impracticality of decision-making using pure reason, especially a situation involving two equal choices. [Imagine a hungry donkey standing equidistant from two identical piles of hay. The donkey tries to decide which pile he should eat first and finding no reason to choose one over another, starves to death. This paradox didn't originate with Jean Buridan (1300-1358) -- it's been found back in Aristotle's time. A hungry and thirsty man cannot decide whether to slake his thirst first or his hunger, and dies. Buridan, in his commentaries on Aristotle, chose a dog, but his critics, in their parody of Buridan, turned it into an ass. So Buridan's ass was named after a person who neither proposed the paradox nor picked that animal to discuss it.] ""Unless we felt strongly enough to exert ourselves in one direction rather than another, we would do nothing, but would suffer the fate of Buridan's ass."" - A.C. Grayling; Though Euphoria Will Fade, Hope Springs Eternal; The Canberra Times (Australia); Nov 12, 2008."
Gretna Green \gret-nuh-GREEN\	"noun A place where many eloping couples are married ""During the 1920s through the '40s, Greenwich had a world-reputation as the 'Gretna Green' of the nation, the magnet for couples in a hurry to get married."" [In the England of the 1700s, a person could not marry without parental consent until age 21. The Scottish were more lenient, allowing young people to marry without parental permission at 16. England also had rules that made it difficult to marry quickly, but Scottish law required only that couples declare their desire to be married in front of witnesses before tying the knot. So it isn't surprising that many English couples ran to Gretna Green, a small village on the English-Scottish border, when they decided to elope. In Gretna Green, the wedding ceremony was typically performed by the blacksmith at a roadside tollhouse, but it was all perfectly legal.]"
balletomane \ba-LET-uh-mayn\	"noun A devotee of ballet. [If you suspected that ""balletomane"" originated with the idea of a ""mania"" for ballet, you are correct. What you may not have guessed is that the language that inspired English speakers to borrow the word in the 1930s was Russian. ""Balletomane"" derives from the Russian noun ""baletoman,"" which in turn combines the word for ""ballet"" (""balet"") and the suffix ""-man,"" from ""maniya"" (meaning ""mania""). The English words ""mania"" and ""ballet"" did not, however, come from Russian. (""Mania"" comes from Latin and Greek, and ""ballet"" comes from French and Italian.) ""Balletomane"" is therefore somewhat unusual, both for its Russian origins and for the fact that it does not follow the more traditional ""-phile"" model for words meaning ""someone who likes a specified thing.""]"
taxis \TAK-sis\	"noun 1. Movement of an organism towards or away from a stimulus. 2. Order, arrangement, or classification. 3. The manual repositioning of a displaced body part to its normal position, in a case of hernia, for example. [From Greek taxis (arrangement, order), from tassein (to arrange). 1. The word tropism is usually applied to plants. 2. The word for a public vehicle, taxi, is unrelated. A taxi is one which taxes, etymologically speaking. It's short for taximeter, the name of the device that calculates the fare.] ""I believe every action an insect makes is due to a reflex, a taxis or a tropism."" - Poppy Adams; The Sister; Anchor; 2009. ""Dionysius wanted to see the entire cosmos as a taxis, in the sense of a hierarchy."" - James H. Charlesworth; Jesus and Archaeology; Wm. B. Eerdmans; 2006."
tropism \TRO-piz-uhm\	"noun The turning or bending (typically by growth instead of movement) of an organism in response to an external stimulus. [From Greek tropos (turning). Ultimately from Indo-European root trep- (to turn) that also gave us troubadour, tropic, entropy, and contrive. The term is usually applied to plants. The response to a stimulus could be positive or negative: towards or away from the stimulus. Some examples of stimuli are light (phototropism), gravity (geotropism), heat (thermotropism), touch (thigmotropism), and water (hydrotropism). The word tropism is related to trope, the term for rhetorical devices such as metaphor and irony. The idea is that the words in those rhetorical devices are turned in a special way.] ""The traits [Judith Miller] has drive many reporters at The Times crazy: her tropism toward powerful men, her frantic intensity, and her peculiar mixture of hard work and hauteur."" - Maureen Dowd; Woman of Mass Destruction; The New York Times; Oct 22, 2005."
congeries \kon-JEER-eez, KON-juh-reez\	"noun A collection of miscellaneous things. [Latin ""congeries"" comes from the Latin verb ""congerere,"" which means ""to carry or bring together"" and which is also the source of our word ""congest."" In English, ""congeries"" stands out because it is a singular word with a plural appearance -- and its plural is also spelled ""congeries."" From Latin congeries (heap), from congerere (to heap up), from con- (with) + gerere (to carry).] ""What an unsightly congeries of mismatched assets the McGuinty government seems to have in mind."" - David Olive; Ontario's Super-corporation Has Hallmarks of Trial Balloon; Toronto Star (Canada); Mar 9, 2010."
starets \STAHR-its, -yits\ plural startsy \STAHRT-see\	"noun A religious teacher or adviser. ""Grigori Rasputin, was neither mad nor a monk, but an unconventional starets."" [From Russian starets (elder). In the Eastern Orthodox Church a starets is a spiritual adviser who is not necessarily a priest.]"
ambuscade \AM-buh-skayd\	"noun An ambush; also: the persons so concealed or their position. [""Ambuscade"" derives from Middle French ""embuscade,"" a modification of an Old Italian word formed by combining the prefix ""in-"" and the Latin noun ""bosco,"" meaning ""forest."" This is appropriate, since many such surprise attacks have involved the attacking force hiding out in and emerging from a wooded area. ""Ambuscade"" has not changed in meaning since General Washington’s day, though nowadays we are more likely to use its synonym ""ambush."" That word actually took a slightly different path to English -- via Middle English ""embushen,"" from Anglo-French ""en-"" (""in-"") and ""busche"" (""log"" or ""firewood"") -- though the two words ultimately share a relationship.]"
flagitious \fluh-JISH-us\	"adjective Extremely wicked or criminal. [""Flagitious"" derives from the Latin noun ""flagitium,"" meaning ""shameful thing,"" and is akin to the Latin noun ""flagrum,"" meaning ""whip."" ""Flagrum"" is also the source of ""flagellate"" (""to whip"" or ""to scourge""), but despite the superficial resemblance it is not the source of ""flagrant,"" meaning ""conspicuously bad."" ""Flagrant"" and its cousins derive instead from Latin ""flagrare,"" meaning ""to burn."" ""Flagitious"" first appeared in the late 14th century, and it was originally applied to people who were horribly criminal or wicked. These days, it can also describe intangibles, such as actions (""flagitious promiscuity""), ideas (""a flagitious notion""), and principles (""flagitious motives"").] ""Ten thousand curses on the head of that infamous villain and flagitious scoundrel."" - Wilbur Smith; Assegai; Macmillan; 2010."
vexillology \vek-suh-LAH-luh-jee\	"noun The study of flags [""The flag is the embodiment, not of sentiment, but of history."" Woodrow Wilson was speaking of the U.S. flag when he made that statement in an address in June of 1915, but those who engage in vexillology -- that is, vexillologists -- would likely find the comment applicable to any national banner. Vexillologists undertake scholarly investigations of flags, producing papers with titles such as ""A Review of the Changing Proportions of Rectangular Flags since Medieval Times, and Some Suggestions for the Future."" In the late 1950s, they coined ""vexillology"" as a name for their field of research from ""vexillum,"" the Latin term for a square flag or banner of the ancient Roman cavalry. The adjectives ""vexillologic"" and ""vexillological"" and the noun ""vexillologist"" followed soon thereafter.] ""He (Whitney Smith) met his second wife in 1975 when he went to Suriname to see its new flag hoisted for the first time. When he began dating his third, and current, wife, he told her he was married to vexillology."" - Irene Sege; Banner Days: This Foremost Expert on Flags Has a Singular View of the World; Boston Globe; Nov 21, 2001. ""Until we can get past threats of boycott, unforgetting bumper stickers and back-room deals, why not an interim state flag that isn't the ugliest in 50 states and Canada, one that looks good and meets the vexillology test of meaningful symbols? A green dollar bill on a field of white."" - Jim Minter; Epitome of Ugliness: Let New Georgia Flag Wave Goodbye; The Atlanta Journal-Constitution; Jul 3, 2001."
aeolian or eolian \ee-O-lee-uhn\	"adjective Relating to or caused by the wind. [After Aeolus, god of the winds in Greek mythology. As keeper of the winds, he gave a bag containing winds to help with Odysseus's sailing.] ""It would not be surprising if a few features -- even very large ones -- were sculpted by aeolian processes into the pyramidal forms we see."" - Carl Sagan and Ann Druyan; The Demon-Haunted World: Science as a Candle in the Dark; Random House; 1995."
edify \ED-uh-fye\	"verb To instruct in order to improve the mind or character. [The Latin noun ""aedes,"" meaning ""house"" or ""temple,"" is the root of ""aedificare,"" a verb meaning ""to erect a house."" Generations of speakers built on that meaning, and by the Late Latin period, the verb had gained the figurative sense of ""to instruct or improve spiritually."" The word eventually passed through Anglo-French before Middle English speakers adopted it as ""edify"" during the 14th century. Two of its early meanings, ""to build"" and ""to establish,"" are now considered archaic; the only current sense of ""edify"" is essentially the same as that figurative meaning in Late Latin, ""to instruct and improve in moral and religious matters.""] “If [translator Jay Rubin’s] suggestion [not to read literature in translation] were to be heeded, most of us would not be edified by the works of Fyodor Dostoevsky, Albert Camus, Italo Calvino, and Saadat Hasan Manto.” - G. Seetharaman; Despite Pitfalls, Publishers Bet on Translated Vernacular Indian Literature; The Economic Times (New Delhi, India); Dec 16, 2013."
virga \VUHR-guh\	noun Rain or snow that evaporates before hitting the ground. [From Latin virga (rod, streak).]
nimbus \NIM-bus\ plural: nimbi or nimbuses	"noun 1. A rain cloud. 2. A halo or aura around the head of a person depicted in a piece of art. [From Latin nimbus (cloud). Ultimately from the Indo-European root nebh- (cloud) that is also the source of nebula, nephometer (a device used in measuring the amount of cloud cover), and Sanskrit nabh (sky).] ""The works take their cue from the perspective view one might see out an airplane window but become a curious exercise in painterly flatness, the white nimbuses butting up along the faint horizon."" - Eric Banks; Georgia O'Keeffe: Abstraction; The Washington Post; Feb 20, 2010. ""He saw that at once; he took that also as the meed due his oil wells and his Yale nimbus, since three years at New Haven, leading no classes and winning no football games, had done nothing to dispossess him of the belief that he was the natural prey of all mothers of daughters."" - William Faulkner; Collected Stories of William Faulkner; Vintage Books; 1995."
pluvial \PLOO-vee-uhl\	adjective Of or relating to rain, especially much rain. [From Latin pluvia (rain), from pluere (to rain). Ultimately from the Indo-European root pleu- (to flow), that is also the source of flow, float, flit, fly, flutter, pulmonary, and pneumonia.]
meed \meed\	"noun Reward; recompense; wage. [From Middle English mede, from Old English med.] ""And speaking of seats, the folding chairs were hideously uncomfortable -- something like that fabled throne in Hades, which demanded a meed of blood and bone if you tried to leave it."" - Craig Smith; Axelrod Quartet and NMSO; The Santa Fe New Mexican; Oct 17, 2003."
macerate \MASS-uh-rayt\	"verb 1. To cause to waste away by or as if by excessive fasting. 2. To cause to become soft or separated into constituent elements by or as if by steeping in fluid; broadly: steep, soak. 3. To soften and wear away especially as a result of being wetted or steeped. [""Macerate"" is derived from the Latin verb ""macerare,"" meaning ""to soften"" or ""to steep."" That meaning was borrowed into English in 1563. However, the first English use of ""macerate"" refers to the wasting away of flesh especially by fasting. That use manifested itself in 1547. A few other manifestations sprouted thereafter from the word's figurative branch (e.g., Laurence Sterne (1713-1768) once wrote of ""a city so macerated with expectation""); however, those extensions wilted in time. Today, the ""steeping"" and ""soaking"" senses of ""macerate"" saturate culinary articles (as in ""macerating fruit in liquor"") as well as other writings (scientific ones, for instance: ""the food is macerated in the gizzard"" or ""the wood is macerated in the solution"").] ""The plastic rubbish has been macerated by marine forces and is composed of small particles that float just below the surface, killing fish that mistake it for food."" - John Maxwell; Boojum Hunting in the Caribbean; Jamaica Observer (Kingston); Jan 24, 2010."
chatelaine \SHAT-uh-layn\	"noun 1. a) The wife of a castellan: the mistress of a chateau. b) The mistress of a household or of a large establishment. 2. A clasp or hook for a watch, purse, or bunch of keys. [The original chatelaine's domain was a castle or fort, and the chatelaine's duties were many. To complete them, she certainly needed keys. In the 18th century, the word ""chatelaine"" (borrowed from the French ""chatelaine"") took on an additional meaning in English that alluded to this: the word came to be used for a decorative clasp or hook from which chains holding a watch, purse, keys, etc. were suspended. These popular accessories evoked the bunch of keys the original chatelaine had worn of necessity.]"
epicureanism \ep-i-kyoo-REE-uh-niz-uhm\	"adjective 1. Devoted to the pursuit of pleasure; fond of good food, comfort, and ease. 2. Suited to the tastes of an epicure. 3. Epicurean. Of or relating to Epicurus or Epicureanism. epicurean noun 1. A devotee to sensuous and luxurious living; an epicure. 2. Epicurean. A follower of Epicurus. [Middle English Epicurien, from Epicure.] ""Today, in an epicurean epitaph, and excerpts from the December issue of Food Arts, they look back on the major dining trends of 1996."""
gasconade \gas-kuh-NAYD\	"noun Boastful talk. verb intr. To boast extravagantly. [The citizens of Gascony in southwestern France have proverbially been regarded as prone to bragging. Their reputation has been immortalized in such swashbuckling literary works as Alexandre Dumas' The Three Musketeers and Edmond Rostand's Cyrano de Bergerac. Linguistically, the legend survives in the word ""gascon,"" meaning ""braggart,"" as well as in ""gasconade"" itself.] ""Stanley Hauerwas's explanation is not appreciated in an era of instant broadcast and electronic gasconade."""
scienter \sy-EN-tuhr\	"adverb Deliberately; knowingly. [In law, scienter is an important concept. Scienter must be shown, i.e. a person was aware -- for example, the currency note he was passing was counterfeit -- to prove the guilt. The word is often used as a noun.] ""The judge said that the complaint, if true, would show BankAtlantic's executives acted with scienter -- the intent or knowledge of wrongdoing that's the key to a plaintiff's argument in a class action complaint."" - Brian Bandell; Judge Lets Class Action Suit Proceed Against BankAtlantic Bancorp; South Florida Business Journal; May 22, 2009."
sciolist \SAI-uh-list\	"noun One who engages in pretentious display of superficial knowledge. [ From Late Latin sciolus (smatterer), diminutive of Latin scius (knowing), from scire (to know). Ultimately from the Indo-European root skei- (to cut or split), which also gave us schism, ski, shin, science, conscience, nice, scienter, nescient, exscind, and adscititious. Earliest documented use: 1810.] ""This consists of some of the dullest sciolism in the history of prose, a standardized academic jargon and rhetoric, the dutiful rehearsal of received theory, and the deliberate misrepresentation of anything challenging or rejecting academic postmodernism."" - Michael Donaghy; The Shape of the Dance; Picador; 2009."
bromide /BRO-myd/	"noun 1. A tired or meaningless remark. 2. A tiresome or boring person. [From bromine, from Greek bromos (stench). Earliest documented use: 1836. In earlier times, potassium bromide used to be taken as a sedative. So any statement that was intended to be soothing (""Don't worry, everything will be OK."") acquired the name bromide. Eventually any commonplace or tired remark and anyone uttering such remarks came to be known as a bromide. The term was popularized in the title of Gelett Burgess's 1906 book ""Are You a Bromide?"" It was to promote this book that Burgess coined the term ""blurb"".] ""His daddy occasionally pops back in to dispense nonsensical bits of advice -- 'If you're not first, you're last' -- a bromide that the young Ricky Bobby adopts as his motto."" - Teresa Wiltz; Where There's Will; Washington Post; Aug 4, 2006. bromidic \broh-MID-ik\ adjective Commonplace; trite."
esurient \i-SOOR-ee-uhnt\	"adjective Hungry; greedy. [From Latin esurire (to be hungry), from edere (to eat). Ultimately from the Indo-European root ed- (to eat, to bite) that has also given us edible, comestible, obese, etch, fret, edacious, prandial, and postprandial.] ""Rising land values have drawn droves of esurient developers."" - Melissa Cassutt; Study Reminds Bonita of Need for Greenspace; Marco Eagle (Marco Island, Florida); Jan 11, 2006. ""This daily show sends esurient teenage aficionados to the cultural birthplace of their favourite dishes."" - It's Cold Turkey for the Junk Food Junkies; Evening Standard (London, UK); May 11, 2007."
coprolalia \kop-ruh-LAY-lee-uh\	noun An uncontrollable or obsessive use of obscene language. [From Greek copro- (dung) + -lalia (chatter, babbling), from lalein (to talk). A related word is coprolite.]
sepulchre \SEP-ul-ker\	"noun 1. A place of burial; tomb 2. A receptacle for religious relics especially in an altar [""Sepulchre"" (also spelled ""sepulcher"") first appeared in Middle English around the beginning of the 13th century. It was originally spelled ""sepulcre,"" a spelling taken from Anglo-French. Like many words borrowed into English from French, ""sepulchre"" has roots in Latin. In Latin, ""sepulchre"" is ""sepulcrum,"" a noun that is derived from the verb ""sepelire,"" which means ""to bury."" ""Sepultus,"" the past participle of ""sepelire,"" gives us -- also by way of Anglo-French -- the related noun ""sepulture,"" which is a synonym for ""burial"" and ""sepulchre.""]"
chary \CHAIR-ee\	"adjective Discreetly cautious: as a) hesitant and vigilant about dangers and risks b) slow to grant, accept, or expend. [It was sorrow that bred the caution of ""chary."" In Middle English ""chary"" meant ""sorrowful,"" a sense that harks back to the word's Old English ancestor ""caru"" (an early form of ""care,"" and another term that originally meant ""sorrow"" or ""grief""). In a sense switch that demonstrates that love can be both bitter and sweet, ""chary"" later came to mean ""dear"" or ""cherished."" That's how 16th century English dramatist George Peele used it: ""the chariest and the choicest queen, That ever did delight my royal eyes."" Both sorrow and affection have largely faded from ""chary,"" however, and in Modern English the word is most often used as a synonym of either ""careful"" or ""sparing.""]"
Antaean \an-TEE-un\	"adjective 1. Mammoth. 2. Having superhuman strength. [In Greek mythology, Antaeus was the gigantic and powerful son of Gaea the Earth goddess and Poseidon the sea god. Antaeus was a wrestler and whenever he touched his mother (the Earth), his strength was renewed, so he always won his battles even if his opponents threw him to the ground. He proved invincible until he challenged Hercules to wrestle. Hercules discovered the source of the giant's strength, lifted him off the ground, and crushed him to death. In 18th century England, the poet William Mason discovered the power of ""Antaean"" as a descriptive English adjective, when he used it in his Ode to the Hon. William Pitt: ""If foil'd at first, resume thy course / Rise strengthen'd with Antaean force.""] ""The former a rich pastry of layered filo and custard and both will be among the array of Greek cuisine prepared in Antaean-proportioned quantities ..."" - Rodney Bosch; Letting the Good Times Roll; Los Angeles Times; Aug 16, 2001."
feculent \FEK-yuh-luhnt\	"adjective Full of filth or waste matter. [From Latin faeculentus (full of dregs), from faeces, plural of faex (dregs).] ""And there is the pool of trash sitting in the North Pacific -- a continent of plastic that will not decompose. Imagine if another species just shoveled feculent matter all over our home?"" - Brittany De Avilan; Deny Warming If You Wish, But Pollution Is Real; The Bee (Sacramento, California); Dec 24, 2009."
fimicolous \fy-MIK-uh-luhs, fuh-\	"adjective Living in or growing in animal excrement. [From Latin fimus (dung) + colere (to inhabit).] ""The shameless consumption of fimicolous humanity was really amusing them."" - Jonathan J. Malone; The Chronicles of Kingdom Come; BookSurge Publishing; 2009."
mewl \myool\	verb To cry, as a baby, young child, or the like; whimper.
coprolite \KOP-ruh-lahyt\	"noun Fossilized animal dung. [From Greek kopro- (dung) + -lite (stone), from lithos (stone).] ""Visitors to the centre can see genuine mineralised Viking excrement on permanent display. The coprolite was discovered in 1972."" - Unusual 'Display'; Scunthorpe Evening Telegraph (UK); Jun 19, 2008."
eschatology \es-kuh-TOL-uh-jee\	noun Theology. The study of end times.
ordure \AWR-jer\	noun Dung; manure; excrement.
assiduous \uh-SIJ-oo-uhs\	"adjective Constant; persistent; industrious. [From Latin assiduus, from assidere (to attend to, to sit down to), from ad- (toward) + sedere (to sit). Ultimately from the Indo-European root sed- (to sit) that is also the source of sit, chair, saddle, assess, sediment, soot, cathedral, and tetrahedron.] ""The reason for his presence there [a Donald Duck statue in a temple garden] remains a mystery despite the author's most assiduous inquiries."" - Jeff Kingston; Chiang Mai: Thailand's beguiling Rose of the North; The Japan Times (Tokyo); Jun 28, 2009."
bibliolatry \bib-lee-OL-uh-tree\	"noun: 1. Excessive devotion to the Bible, especially to its literal interpretation. 2. Extreme devotion to books. [From Greek biblio- (book) + -latry (worship).] ""Fifty percent of college graduates expect Jesus to be here any day now. We are, says Paul Boyer, almost unique in the Western World in combining high educational levels with high levels of bibliolatry."" - Martin Gardner; Waiting for the Last Judgement; The Washington Post; Nov 8, 1992. ""Bibliophilia: the love, and collecting, of books. No problems there... But watch out. The next step up may be bibliolatry: an extreme fondness for books."" - David McKie; The Baron of Bibliomania; The Guardian (London, UK); May 5, 2008."
infra dig \IN-fruh-DIG\	"adjective Being beneath one's dignity; undignified [In her autobiography, Eleanor Roosevelt wrote ""No one can make you feel inferior without your consent."" In other (less eloquent) words, don't put up with any treatment or situation that is unendurably infra dig. The word ""infra dig"" is used in relatively casual, sometimes sarcastic contexts (e.g., ""Apparently, drugstore-purchased shampoo is too infra dig for my glamorous sister -- only the most expensive salon shampoos will do!""). ""Infra dig"" is a shortened version of the Latin phrase ""infra dignitatem,"" meaning ""beneath dignity.""]"
epigraph \EP-i-graf\	"noun 1. An inscription on a building or statue. 2. A quotation introducing a book or a chapter. [From Greek epi- (on, upon) + -graph (writing).] ""A Counterfeit Silence includes an epigraph from Thornton Wilder: 'Even speech was for them a debased form of silence.'"" - William Grono and Dennis Haskell; Solitary Writer Randolph Stow Chose Silence; The Australian (Sydney); Jun 1, 2010."
struthious \STROO-thee-us\	"adjective Of or relating to the ostriches and related birds. [""Struthious"" can be scientific and literal, or it can be figurative with the meaning ""ostrich-like,"" as in our example sentence. The extended use suggests a tendency to bury one’s head in the sand like an ostrich. But do ostriches really do this? No -- the bird's habit of lying down and flattening its neck and head against the ground to escape detection gave rise to the misconception. The word ""struthious"" has been fully visible in English since the 18th century. ""Ostrich"" is much older. Anglo-French speakers created ""ostriz"" from Vulgar Latin ""avis struthio"" (""ostrich bird""); Middle English speakers made it ""ostrich"" in the 13th century. Scientists seeking a genus word for ostriches turned back to Latin, choosing ""struthio.""] ""The law is not so struthious as to compel a judge...to divorce himself or herself from common sense or to ignore what is perfectly obvious."""
stenosis \sti-NO-sis\	"noun A narrowing of a passage, vessel, or an opening in the body. [From steno- (narrow, small) + -osis (condition). From Greek stenosis (a narrowing), from stenoun (to narrow), from stenos (narrow).] ""[The device] is placed onto a patient's chest and a microphone picks up coronary sounds associated with stenosis, in which a patient's arteries are clogged with plaque blocking blood flow to the heart."" - Wendy Lee; New Phone Apps Aim to Boost; Minneapolis Star Tribune; Jun 12, 2010."
equipoise \EE-kwuh-poiz, Ek-wuh-\	"noun 1. A state of balance. 2. Something that serves as a counterbalance. verb tr. To counterbalance. [From Latin aequi- (equal) + Old French pois (weight), from Latin pendere (to weigh). Ultimately from the Indo-European root (s)pen- (to draw, to spin), which is also the source of pendulum, spider, pound, pansy, pendant, ponder, appendix, penthouse, depend, and spontaneous.] ""In his [Denzel Washington's] luminous portrait, dignity and destructiveness find a perfect equipoise."" - John Lahr; Theatre: Wheels of Misfortune; The New Yorker; May 10, 2010."
mephitic \muh-FIT-ik\	"adjective Poisonous or foul-smelling. [From Latin mephitis (foul smell).] ""Jack Black is a sterling example of the actor who starts out seeming like a breath of fresh air, and then turns into something stale, fetid, mephitic, nauseating."" - Joe Queenan; Do You Remember When Jack Black Was Funny?; The Guardian (London, UK); Oct 9, 2009."
prolegomenon \proh-lih-GAH-muh-nahn\	"noun A critical, introductory discussion, especially an introduction to a text. [""Prolegomenon"" is the singular and ""prolegomena"" is the plural of this scholarly word, though people sometimes mistakenly interpret ""prolegomena"" as the singular. The word, which comes from the Greek verb ""prolegein"" (""to say beforehand""), first appeared in print around 1652. It has appeared in the titles of noteworthy scholarly and philosophical works, but it has never been as common in general use as its older cousin ""prologue."" ""Prologue"" usually refers to an introduction to a literary work or to a speech addressed to the audience at the beginning of a play. ""Prolegomenon"" is most often used of the introduction to a work of scholarly analysis. Both words can also be used in a broader sense to refer generally to something that serves as an introduction.] “With a witty and intriguing prolegomenon by Ashis Nandy, the book includes 76 poems that are travelogues of exile, identity, and adolescent fantasy of belonging and abandonment, portraying everyday struggles of existence.” - A Lyrical Celebration; Financial Express (New Delhi, India); Dec 28, 2014."
Barmecidal \bahr-muh-SYE-dul\	"adjective Providing only the illusion of abundance. [""Barmecide"" is the name of a family of princes in a tale from The Thousand and One Nights (also known as The Arabian Nights' Entertainment). One prince in the family torments a beggar by inviting him to a fabulous feast, at which all the dishes are imaginary. The poor man plays along with his malicious host, pretending to get drunk on the imaginary wine; he then gets even by knocking down the patronizing royal.]"
agita \AJ-uh-tuh\	"noun Heartburn, agitation or anxiety. [Judging by its spelling and meaning, you might think that ""agita"" is simply a shortened version of ""agitation,"" but that's not the case. Both ""agitation"" and the verb ""agitate"" derive from Latin ""agere"" (""to drive""). ""Agita,"" which first appeared in American English in the early 1980s, comes from a dialectical pronunciation of the Italian word ""acido,"" meaning ""heartburn"" or ""acid,"" from Latin ""acidus."" (""Agita"" is also occasionally used in English with the meaning ""heartburn."") For a while the word's usage was limited to New York City and surrounding regions, but the word became more widespread in the mid-90s.] ""The idea of having only one key standing between me and a totally moribund Camaro gives me agita, however. A second key is clearly advisable. Like all great business executives, I delegate the problem to my chief operating officer in these matters, my wife - who is, as you may guess, a woman."" - Stanley Bing, Bing! It's a !@#$% Man's World, Fortune (New York), Oct 14, 2002. ""Ms. Falco and Mr. Tucci bring a more earthy, New York agita to the roles. After growing up in the New York suburbs -- she on Long Island, he in Westchester County -- the two have made careers playing incomplete, angular characters."" - John Leland, Haltingly, Layers Of Clothing Fall Away, The New York Times, Aug 4, 2002."
folderol \FOL-duh-rol\	"noun: 1. Nonsense; foolishness. 2. A trifle; gewgaw. [From a nonsense refrain in some old songs. The word is also spelled as falderal.] ""Canonisation is a slow business in the Catholic church: all that folderol about miracles and devil's advocates."" - John Sutherland; What's Wrong With Teaching Rap in Schools?; The Guardian (London, UK); Jul 5, 2004."
panegyric \pan-i-JIR-ik, -JY-rik\	"noun A formal or elaborate oration in praise of someone or something; eulogy. [On certain fixed dates throughout the year, the ancient Greeks would come together for religious meetings. Such gatherings could range from hometown affairs to great national assemblies, but large or small, the meeting was called a ""panegyris."" (That name comes from ""pan,"" meaning ""all,"" and ""agyris,"" meaning ""assembly."") At those assemblies, speakers provided the main entertainment, and they delivered glowing orations extolling the praises of present civic leaders and reliving the past glories of Greek cities. To the Greeks, those laudatory speeches were ""panegyrikos,"" which means ""of or for a panegyris."" Latin speakers ultimately transformed ""panegyrikos"" into the noun ""panegyricus,"" and English speakers adapted that Latin term to form ""panegyric.""] ""Football's over reliance on expert based statistics, mathematical probabilities and the highest panegyric going to non-players goes against my grain."""
declivity \di-KLIV-uh-tee\	"noun 1. Downward inclination. 2. A descending slope. [Three different English words descend from ""clivus,"" the Latin word for ""slope"" or ""hill"" -- with the help of three Latin prefixes. ""Declivity"" combines ""clivus"" with the prefix ""de-,"" meaning ""down"" or ""away."" ""Acclivity"" uses ""ad-"" (which may change its second letter depending on the root word), meaning ""to"" or ""toward."" Hence, an acclivity is an upward slope. The third word has a figurative meaning in English: ""proclivity"" makes use of the prefix ""pro-,"" meaning ""forward,"" and this word refers to a personal inclination, predisposition, or ""leaning.""]"
inenarrable \in-ih-NAIR-uh-bul\	"adjective Incapable of being narrated; indescribable [""Ineffable,"" ""inenarrable,"" ""indescribable"" -- English has quite a few words for expressing that which can't be expressed. The prefix ""in-,"" meaning ""not,"" teamed up with Latin ""enarrare"" (""to explain in detail"") to give us ""inenarrable,"" and the same prefix joined with Latin ""effabilis"" (""capable of being expressed"") to create ""ineffable."" English speakers have used ""ineffable"" since the 14th century, and ""inenarrable"" made its way into the language from French in the 15th century. ""Indescribable"" was a late arrival, relatively speaking -- it has only been with us since the 18th century.]"
friable \FRYE-uh-bul\	"adjective Easily crumbled or pulverized. [""Friable"" entered into English in the mid-1500s, and was borrowed either from Middle French or directly from Latin ""friabilis."" This Latin adjective comes from the verb ""friare,"" which means ""to crumble."" ""Fiare"" in turn is related to the verb ""fricare"" (""to rub""), the source of the English noun ""friction."" ""Friable"" is used to describe something that can be easily reduced to a powdered form. In contemporary usage, it is often found in the discussion of asbestos. Health concerns about asbestos primarily center around friable asbestos -- that is, asbestos that is easily pulverized into tiny fibers which may remain suspended in the air and become a potential health risk to those who inhale them.]"
poetaster \POH-uh-tass-ter\	"noun An inferior poet. [In Latin, the suffix ""-aster"" indicates partial resemblance. In both Latin and English, that often translates to ""second-rate,"" or maybe even ""third-rate."" Not surprisingly, ""poetaster"" often goes hand in hand with ""doggerel,"" meaning ""verse marked by triviality or inferiority."" ""Most of the people who send me thick sheaves of handwritten or word-processed doggerel,"" Ms. Greer tells us in the Independent article we quote above, ""appear never to have read any poetry, good or bad.... Every week poetasters, like literary flashers seeking to amaze and appal hapless passers-by with the sight of their grey flaccidities, send their effusions to people like me."" Are there are other kinds of ""-asters"" out there? Yes indeed -- we have criticasters, philosophasters, and politicasters, among others.] ""In the title story, a poetaster suffering from 'chronic acuteness' is rushed to the hospital before his verse does much harm."" - Anthony Bukoski; Average Joes Wind Up in 'Hospital'; Star-Tribune (Minneapolis, Minnesota); May 3, 2009. ""You have revealed yourself to the world as a conceited little poetaster."" - Simon Barnes; Rooney No Longer in Control of Fame Game; The Times (London, UK); Sep 13, 2010."
psychopomp \SY-co-pomp\	"noun A guide of souls, one who escorts the soul of a newly-deceased to the afterlife. [From Greek psychopompos (conductor of souls), from psycho-, from psyche (breath, spirit, soul) + pompos (conductor, guide).] ""Harold Bloom here presents himself as a mystagogue and a soothsayer, a psychopomp of our times, conducting souls into unknown territories."" - Marina Warner; Where Angels Tread; The Washington Post; Sep 15, 1996."
noisome \NOI-suhm\	"adjective 1. Offensive, especially to the sense of smell. 2. Harmful; noxious. [From Middle English noy (short of annoy), via French, from Latin inodiare (to make hateful), from in- (intensive prefix) + odium (hate).] ""Phasing out of noisome exhausts on motorbikes should be handled seriously and urgently."" - ESG Response; Gibraltar Chronicle; Nov 28, 2009."
diadem \DAHY-uh-dem\	noun 1. A crown. 2. A cloth headband, sometimes adorned with jewels, formerly worn by Oriental kings. 3. Royal dignity or authority. Transitive verb 4. To adorn with or as if with a diadem; crown.
artificer \ahr-TIF-uh-suhr\	"noun 1. An inventor. 2. A craftsperson. 3. A mechanic in the armed forces. [From Latin artificium (craftsmanship, art), from art + facere (to make).] ""The artificer turns a little sadly to his king: 'One day, I hope mankind will find a peaceful use for my invention,' he says."""
meretricious \mer-i-TRISH-uhs\	"adjective 1. Appealing in a cheap or showy manner: tawdry. 2. Based on pretense or insincerity. [From Latin meretricius, meretrix (prostitute), from merere (to earn money).] ""For most of the 20th century John Singer Sargent's skills as a portraitist were deemed to be meretricious."" - Waldemar Januszczak; A Dirty Old Man And the Sea?; The Sunday Times (London, UK); Jul 11, 2010."
beggar \BEG-uhr\ (verb sense)	"transitive verb 1. To deplete; to defy. 2. To impoverish. ""Geraldine Feeney said the story told by Mr Boyle beggared belief."""
tawdry \TAW-dree\	adjective 1. (of finery, trappings, etc.) Gaudy; showy and cheap. 2. Low or mean; base: tawdry motives. noun 3. Cheap, gaudy apparel.
jejune \ji-JOON\	"adjective: 1. Dull; insipid. 2. Immature 3. Malnourished [From Latin jejunus (empty, hungry, fasting, meager). A related word is jejunum, the middle part of the small intestine. It was so called because it was usually found empty after death.] ""Some songs are inspired and done with a knowing sense of irony. Others are jaw-droppingly jejune."" - John Doyle; Glee's Back; Globe and Mail (Toronto, Canada); Apr 13, 2010."
odoriferous \o-duh-RIF-uhr-uhs\	"adjective: 1. Giving off an odor. 2. Morally offensive. [From Latin odor + -ferous (bearing), from ferre (to bear).] ""Boys are fully aware of their odoriferous ways and are reluctant to change without the proper inspiration."" - Curtis Weber; When Guiding Boys, Better to Open Your Heart Than Follow Your Nose; Kansas City Star; Mar 12, 2010. ""It's dead certain that when Arnold Schwarzenegger walks out of the governor's Capitol office next January, he'll leave the odoriferous budget mess behind."" - Dan Walters; Candidates All Agree on Silence; Sacramento Bee (California); Mar 14, 2010."
colloquy \KAH-luh-kwee\	"noun 1. Conversation, dialogue. 2. A high-level serious discussion: conference. [""Colloquy"" may make you think of ""colloquial,"" and there is indeed a connection between the two words. As a matter of fact, ""colloquy"" is the parent word from which ""colloquial"" was coined in the mid-18th century. ""Colloquy"" itself, though now the less common of the two words, has been a part of the English language since the 15th century. It is a descendant of Latin ""loqui,"" meaning ""to speak."" Other descendants of ""loqui"" in English include ""eloquent,"" ""loquacious,"" ""ventriloquism,"" and ""soliloquy,"" as well as ""elocution"" and ""interlocutor.""] ""The company's employees worried and speculated as the executive team remained closeted in an intense colloquy for the entire morning."""
inamorata \in-am-uh-RAH-tuh\	noun plural-tas A woman who loves or is loved; female sweetheart or lover.
moraine \muh-RAYN\	"noun An accumulation of boulders, gravel, or other debris carried and deposited by a glacier. [From French moraine, from Savoy dialect morena (mound).] ""Professor Shulmeister's team believes a large landslide dumped a huge volume of rock on top of the glacier, causing it to advance and, when the advance stopped, the moraine was created."""
stolid \STAH-lid\	"adjective Having or expressing little or no sensibility: unemotional. [""Stolid"" derives from ""stolidus,"" a word that means ""dull"" or ""stupid"" in Latin. It is also distantly related to the word ""stultify,"" meaning ""to cause to appear or be stupid, foolish, or absurdly illogical."" The earliest examples of usage for ""stolid,"" dating back to the 17th century, indicate that it too was originally associated with a lack of smarts; it was used to describe people who were considered dull or stupid because they didn't wear their emotions on their sleeves. By the1800s, however, ""stolid"" was frequently appearing without the connotation of foolishness, and it continues to be free of such overtones today.] “But it would be very hard to confuse her for Marie Arnet’s lissom Susanna, even in the dark. There is almost as little sexual chemistry between Jonathan Lemalu’s stolid, character-less Figaro and Arnet’s more charming Susanna.” - Anthony Holden; A Marriage Made in Hell; The Observer (London, UK); Nov 5, 2006."
esker \ES-kuhr\	"noun A long, narrow ridge of gravel and sand deposited by a stream flowing in or under a retreating glacier. [From Irish eiscir (ridge of gravel).] ""My geography teacher likened an esker to the mess left by a drunk simultaneously walking backward and throwing up."""
estival or aestival /ES-ti-vuhl/	"adjective Relating to or occurring in summer. [Via French from Latin aestivus (of or relating to summer).] ""Ms. Croghan confides that she is sometimes known as a battle ax, both to locals and estival visitors."""
cirque /suhrk/	"noun 1. A bowl-shaped semicircular mountain basin carved by glacial erosion. Also called cwm. 2. A ring; a circle. Via French from Latin circus (circle). Ultimately from the Indo-European root sker- (to turn or bend) which is also the source of other words such as ranch, rank, shrink, circle, crisp, search, ring, curb, ridge, curve, and circa.] ""In the Snowies, cirques only occur on sheltered mountain faces where the snow first fell and slowly compacted into glacial ice."" - Peter Veness; Australia: Peak-Time Perfection Just Across the Ditch; The New Zealand Herald (Auckland); Feb 22, 2009."
moil \MOYL\	"verb 1. To work hard. 2. To churn, swirl. [""Moil"" may mean ""to work hard"" but its origins are the opposite of hard; it ultimately derives from Latin ""mollis,"" meaning ""soft."" (Other English derivatives of ""mollis"" are ""emollient,"" ""mollify,"" and ""mollusk."") A more immediate ancestor of ""moil"" is the Anglo-French verb ""moiller,"" meaning ""to make wet, dampen,"" and one of the early meanings of ""moil"" in English was ""to become wet and muddy."" The ""work hard"" sense of ""moil"" appears most frequently in the pairing ""toil and moil."" Both ""moil"" and ""toil"" can also be nouns meaning ""work."" ""Moil"" implies work that is drudgery and ""toil"" suggests prolonged and fatiguing labor.] ""Why should he toil and moil...when...the strong arm of his Uncle will raise and support him?"""
auteur \O-tuhr\	"noun A filmmaker, such as a director, who has a distinct personal style and is involved in all aspects of movie-making, giving a film the unique imprint of the filmmaker. [From French auteur (originator or author), from Latin auctor (originator), from augere (to originate, to increase). Some other words derived from the same root are auction, author, and inaugurate, and augment.] ""Ang Lee, a Taiwanese director who'd been working as a kind of auteur-for-hire, but he blew it off to 'go Hollywood'."""
grimalkin \grih-MAWL-kin\	"noun A domestic cat, especially an old female cat. [In the opening scene of Macbeth, one of the three witches planning to meet with Macbeth suddenly announces, ""I come, Graymalkin."" The witch is responding to the summons of her familiar, or guardian spirit, which is embodied in the form of a cat. Shakespeare's ""graymalkin"" literally means ""gray cat."" The ""gray"" is of course the color; the ""malkin"" was a nickname for Matilda or Maud that came to be used in dialect as a general name for a cat (and sometimes a hare). By the 1630s, ""graymalkin"" had been altered to the modern spelling ""grimalkin.""] ""Maizy, the family grimalkin, wasn't as fast as she used to be, but she was still very good at catching mice."""
squinny \SKWIN-ee\	"verb To squint [""I remember thine eyes well enough. Dost thou squiny at me?"" So asks Shakespeare's mad King Lear of blind Gloucester, marking the first use of the verb ""squinny"" in 1605. It is likely that Shakespeare formed the word from an earlier English word ""squin,"" meaning ""with the eye directed to one side."" Shakespeare also uses the more familiar ""squint"" in King Lear: ""This is the foul fiend Flibbertigibbet.... He gives the web and the pin, / squints the eye, and makes the harelip; mildews the white wheat, / and hurts the poor creature of earth."" Although this is not the first known use of the verb ""squint,"" which appears in print six years earlier, it is the first known use of the verb's transitive sense.]"
sidereal \sy-DEE-ree-uhl\	"adjective 1. Relating to the stars. 2. Measured with reference to the apparent motion of the stars. For example, sidereal time. [From Latin sidus (star).] ""The silvery, coarse grain of Maisel's prints in negative makes it hard to tell whether they present day or night views. In several, a darkness looms different from that of sidereal night."" - Kenneth Baker; 'Home Movies' Not Like the Ones Your Dad Made; San Francisco Chronicle; Apr 14, 2007."
colporteur \KAWL-por-tuhr\	"noun A peddler of religious books. [From French colporteur (peddler), from col (neck) + porter (to carry), from Latin portare, from the idea of a peddler carrying his wares in a bag hung around his neck. Ultimately from Indo-European root per- (to lead, pass over) that gave us other words such as support, comport, petroleum, sport, passport, Swedish fartlek (a training technique), Norwegian fjord (bay), and Sanskrit parvat (mountain).] ""By then, because a Seventh-day Adventist colporteur had come into Croscombe selling religious tracts, his parents had joined that Church, and Hardy became a keen member of it."" - The Rev Bertram Hardy; The Times (London, UK); Mar 27, 2003."
rapporteur \rap-or-TUHR\	noun 1. Someone appointed to investigate/monitor an issue, and compile and present the findings. 2. One who is designated to record the deliberations of a meeting. [From French rapporteur (reporter), from rapporter (to bring back, report), from apporter (to bring), from Latin portare (carry). Ultimately from the Indo-European root per- (to lead, pass over) that also gave us support, comport, petroleum, sport, passport, colporteur (a peddler of religious books), Swedish fartlek (a training technique), Norwegian fjord (bay), and Sanskrit parvat (mountain). The word rapporteur in French has various other meanings besides a reporter, such as an informer or a tattletale, and a protractor.]
veridical \vuh-RID-ih-kul\	"adjective 1. Truthful, veracious. 2. Real. [We'll tell only the truth here: ""veridical"" comes from the Latin word ""veridicus,"" which itself is from two other Latin words: ""verus,"" meaning ""true,"" and ""dicere,"" meaning ""to say."" ""Verus"" is an ancestor of several English words, among them ""verity,"" ""verify,"" and ""very"" (which originally meant ""true""). The word ""verdict"" is related to ""veridical"" on both sides of the family: it also traces back to ""verus"" and ""dicere."" ""Veridical"" itself is the least common of the ""verus"" words. You're most likely to encounter it in contexts dealing with psychology and philosophy.] ""It's both surreal and veridical, whimsical and graphic, straightforward and sly."" - Charlotte O'Sullivan; Up to No Good; The Independent on Sunday (London, UK); Sep 29, 2002. ""If split-brain patients are given such tests, the left hemisphere generates many false reports. But the right brain does not; it provides a much more veridical account."" - Michael S. Gazzaniga and John W. Karapelou; The Split Brain Revisited; Scientific American (Washington, DC); Jul 1, 1998."
epeolatry \ep-i-OL-uh-tree\	noun The worship of words. [From Greek epos (word) + -latry (worship). The first citation of the word is from Oliver Wendell Holmes, Sr., in his 1860 book Professor at the Breakfast Table.]
savoir-faire \SAV-wahr-fayr\	"noun The ability to say or do the right thing in any situation; tact. [From French savoir-faire (know-how), from savoir (to know) + faire (to do).] ""In a cascade of thanks, C.S. Richardson bows gracefully to all those elegant Londoners, full of savoir faire."" - Peter Wells; The A to Z of Life; New Zealand Herald (Auckland); Jul 7, 2008."
agent provocateur \ah-ZHON-proh-vok-uh-TUHR\	"noun Someone employed to encourage or provoke suspects into doing something illegal so they can be arrested or discredited. [From French agent provocateur (provoking agent).] ""Stanislav Beranek was critical over the creation of the role of agent provocateur, who will seek to provoke artificial situations in which someone will accept a bribe."""
nabob \NAY-bob\	noun 1. A governor in India under the Mogul Empire. Also called nawab. 2. A person of wealth and prominence. [Hindi nawab, nabab, from Arabic nuwwab, pl. of na'ib, deputy.]
mahatma \muh-HAT-muh\	"noun 1. A person to be revered for high-mindedness, wisdom, and selflessness. 2. A person of great prestige in a field of endeavor. [""Mahatma"" is an adaptation of the Sanskrit word ""mahatman,"" which literally meant ""great-souled."" As a general, uncapitalized English noun, ""mahatma"" can refer to any great person; in India, it is used as a title of love and respect. When capitalized, however, it usually refers to Mohandas Karamchand Gandhi, the great leader who helped guide India to independence in 1947. Renowned for his policy of nonviolent protest, he was widely known as ""Mahatma Gandhi"" or ""the Mahatma."" The title was reportedly conferred on him by poet Rabindranath Tagore in 1915, but spiritual leader and author Paramahansa Yogananda claimed that Gandhi didn’t embrace it himself. According to Yogananda, Gandhi never referred to himself as ""Mahatma,"" but rather ""made some humble, and witty, protests about the title.""] ""How could our 'mahatma of mulch' Ketzel Levine excite such emotion."" - Holiday Gift Ideas for Gardeners; Weekend Edition - Saturday (NPR); Dec 16, 1995. ""On 9 January, 1915, ... Gandhi landed in Bombay... Soon after..in a published letter, the poet Rabindranath Tagore conferred on him the title of 'Mahatma', of which the literal meaning is 'great soul'. - H.N. Brailsford, in H.S.L. Polak, 1949."
maharajah or maharaja \ma-ha-ra-juh, -zhuh\	noun 1. A king or prince in India ranking above a rajah, especially the sovereign of one of the former native states. 2. Used as a title for such a king or prince. [Hindi maharaja, from Sanskrit : maha-, great, + raja, king]
sannyasi (sun-YA-see) or sannyasin (-sin)	"noun A wandering mendicant and ascetic. [Hindi sannyasi, from Sanskrit samnyasi, from samnyasyati, he renounces : sam, together, + ni, down + asyati, he throws.] ""Meanwhile her mother had died and her father had renounced life and became a sanyasi."" - Thiruchandran, Selvy, Ideology, Caste, Class and Gender [Part 12 of 35], Contemporary Women's Issues Database, 1 Jan 1997."
mendicant \MEN-di-kuhnt\	"adjective 1. Living on alms. 2. Like a beggar. noun 1. A beggar. 2. A member of any of various orders of friars forbidden to own property and living on alms. [From Latin mendicare (to beg), from mendicus (beggar), from mendum (defect).] ""But Metro, a perennial mendicant with no dependable dedicated, long-term source of capital funding, could hardly afford to scrap or completely rebuild the older cars."" - Common Sense at Metro; Washington Post; Sep 30, 2009."
plebiscite (PLEB-i-syte)	noun 1. A direct vote in which the entire electorate is invited to accept or refuse a proposal. 2. A vote in which a population exercises the right of national self-determination. [French plebiscite, from Latin plebiscitum : plebis, genitive of plebs, the people + scitum, decree, from neuter past participle of sciscere, to vote for, inchoative of scire, to know.]
mugwump \MUG-wump\	"noun 1. A person who acts independently or remains neutral, especially in politics. 2. Often Mugwump. A Republican who bolted the party in 1884, refusing to support presidential candidate James G. Blaine. [Massachusett mugquomp, mummugquomp, war leader.] ""Mr. and Mrs. America are hopelessly moderate mugwumps, difference-splitters par excellence."""
minim \MIN-uhm\	"noun 1. An insignificantly small portion or thing. 2. A downward vertical stroke in handwriting. [Middle English, half note, from Medieval Latin minimus, least, from Latin.] ""Streaking the ground with sinuous trace: not all Minims of nature; some of serpent kind, Wondrous in length and corpulence, involved Their snaky folds, and added wings."" - Milton, John, Paradise Lost: Seventh Book."
extravasate \ik-STRAV-uh-sayt\	"verb 1. Pathology. To force the flow of (blood or lymph) from a vessel out into surrounding tissue. 2. Geology. To cause (molten lava) to pour forth from a volcanic vent. [Extra- + vas (o)- + -ate.] ""Malignant cells then extravasate from the vessel into the host tissue where they grow and produce a metastatic tumor."""
decerebrate \dee-SER-uh-brayt\	"verb tr. To eliminate cerebral brain function in (an animal) by removing the cerebrum, cutting across the brain stem, or severing certain arteries in the brain stem, as for purposes of experimentation. adjective 1. Deprived of cerebral function. 2. Resulting from or as if from decerebration. 3. Lacking intelligence or reason. noun A decerebrate animal or person. ""At this moment, presumably, Lincoln became decerebrate - that is, brain dead."""
tessera \TES-uhr-uh\ plural tesserae: TES-uhr-ee\	noun A small piece of stone, glass, or tile used to make a mosaic. [From Latin, from Greek tesseres, variant of tessares (four), from the four corners of its square shape.]
identic \eye-DEN-tik\	"adjective 1. Relating to a diplomatic action in which two or more governments agree to follow the same course in relations with another government. 2. Identical. [From Latin identicus (identical).] ""The Ottoman response of the same day ... led the ambassadors to forward an identic note pressuring the Ottoman government."" - M. Sukru Hanioglu; Preparation for a Revolution; Oxford University Press; 2001."
extraterritoriality \ek-struh-ter-i-tor-ee-AL-i-tee\	"noun Exemption from the jurisdiction of local law, granted to foreign diplomats. [From Latin extra- (outside) + territorium (land around a town), from terra (land).] ""Henry McMaster also said he plans to argue that the extraterritoriality principle bars one state from passing laws that would affect people in other states."""
stile \style\	"noun 1. A set or series of steps for crossing a fence or wall. 2. A turnstile. [Middle English, from Old English stigel.] A vertical member of a panel or frame, as in a door or window sash. [Probably from Dutch stijl, doorpost, from Middle Dutch, possibly from Latin stilus, pole, post.] ""After about two miles the canal joins the river, and you climb a stile and walk on to the sea."" - Caroline Dilke, A man, a plan, a canal - all strictly for the birds, Independent, 22 Nov 1997. ""A wise choice is to order a mid-rail option on stile and rail doors."" - Grant O. Young, Making an Entrance, AS&U, American School & University, 1 Dec 1997."
angary \ANG-guh-ree\ also angaria \ang-GAR-ee-uh\	"noun The legal right of a belligerent to seize, use, or destroy the property of a neutral, provided that full compensation is made. [Late Latin angaria, service to a lord, from Greek angareia, impressment for public service, from angaros, conscript courier.] ""While this approach does have its advantages, one problem is that the development of institutions is not always clear. This is especially the case in the sections covering taxation, requisition, and impressment (angaria) by the army."" - Roth, Jonathan, The Limits of Empire: The Roman Army in the East. (Book reviews), The Journal of the American Oriental Society, 18 Jul 1996."
hight \hyte\	"adjective Archaic. Named or called. [Middle English, past participle of highten, hihten, to call, be called, from hehte, hight, past tense of hoten, from Old English hatan.] ""It was a Moorish maiden was sitting by a well, And what that maiden thought of, I cannot, cannot tell, When by there rode a valiant knight, from the town of Oviedo-- Alphonso Guzman was he hight, the Count of Desparedo."" - William Edmonstoune Aytoun, The Broken Pitcher, The World's Best Poetry on CD, 20 Mar 1995."
wether \WETH-uhr\	"noun A castrated ram. [Middle English, from Old English, wether, from Germanic wethruz, perhaps ""yearling"".] ""The wolf, well-sated, puts himself to sleep counting his bags of wool, then dreams of queues replete with shivering wethers, meaty ewes;"" Melissa Cannon; Fairy Tale and Gloss; Ploughshares, Mar 1996."
decolletage or décolletage \day-kol-TAZH, -kol-uh-\	"noun A low neckline on a woman's dress. [From French décolletage (low-cut), past participle of décolleter (to expose the neck), from de- (away) + collet (collar), diminutive of col (neck).] ""If you order The Proposal [as an in-flight movie on Saudi Arabian Airlines], you get a blurry blob over Sandra Bullock's modest decolletage, and even her clavicles."""
patronym \PA-truh-nim\	noun 1. A name derived from the name of father or an ancestor, e.g. Johnson (son of John). 2. A surname or family name. [From Greek patronymous (patronymic), from patri- (father) + -onym (name).] Here are a few more patronyms from other languages and cultures: * Arabic bin (bin Laden, son of Laden), bint (Bint Ahmed, daughter of Ahmed) * Hebrew ben (Ben-Gurion, son of Gurion; Ben-Hur, son of Hur) * Hindi -putra/put (Brahmaputra, son of Brahma; Rajput, son of king) * Irish and Scottish Mac/Mc- (McDonald, son of Donald) * Irish O (O'Brien, grandson/descendant of Brien) * Norman Fitz- (Fitzgerald, son of Gerald) * Russian -ich/-vich, as a middle name (Anton Pavlovich Chekhov, son of Pavel). * Spanish -ez (Fernandez, son of Fernando; Gonzalez son of Gonzalo) *Welsh ap or p (Pritchard from ap Richard, son of Richard).
prophylactic \proh-fuh-LAK-tik, prof-uh-\	adjective 1. Protecting from or preventing disease. 2. Protective or preventive. noun 3. A prophylactic drug or device, esp a condom. [C16: via French from Greek prophulaktikos, from prophulassein to guard by taking advance measures, from pro-² + phulax a guard]
paranymph \PAIR-uh-nimf\	"noun 1. A friend going with a bridegroom to fetch home the bride in ancient Greece; also: the bridesmaid conducting the bride to the bridegroom. 2. a) Best man b) Bridesmaid. ""The bride and groom, accompanied by their paranymphs, stood before the officiating clergy."" [""Paranymph"" resulted from the marriage of the Greek prefix ""para-"" and the Greek word for bride, ""nymphe."" The prefix ""para-"" can mean ""beside"" or ""alongside of,"" as is apparent in the word ""parallel,"" from the Greek word ""parallelos,"" a union of ""para-"" and the word ""allenon,"" meaning ""of one another."" At one time, the word ""paranymph"" also was used for a person who solicits or speaks for another -- that is, an advocate -- but that sense is now very rare.]"
subtile \SUT-l, SUB-tuhl\	"adjective Subtle: delicate; fine; not obvious; skillful. [From Latin subtilis (finely woven), from sub- (under) + from tela (cloth on a loom). Ultimately from the Indo-European root teks- (to weave) that is also the source of text, tissue, tectonic, architect, technology.] ""The fragrance is quite subtile."""
dizen \DY-zuhn, DIZ-uhn\	"verb tr. 1. To attire with finery. 2. To dress or decorate in a gaudy manner. [From Old English dis- (a bunch of flax on a distaff for spinning).] ""Looking at Lily Savage's costumes, I was reminded of Carlyle's description of Madame Dubarry as a 'wonderfully dizened Scarlet-woman'."" - Michael Billington; Aladdin: Sir Ian Proves There's Nothing Quite Like a (Panto) Dame; The Guardian (London, UK); Dec 20, 2004."
antecessor \an-tih-SESS-er\	"noun Predecessor. ""Literary critics hailed the first novel as a brilliant and groundbreaking follow-up to famous antecessors in the genre."""
phatic \FATT-ik\	"adjective Relating to a communication meant to generate an atmosphere of social relationship rather than to convey some information. [""Phatic"" was coined in the early 20th century by people who apparently wanted to label a particular quirk of human communication--the tendency to use certain rote phrases (such as the standard greeting ""how are you?"") merely to establish a social connection without sharing any actual information. It probably won't surprise you, then, to learn that ""phatic"" derives from the Greek ""phatos,"" a form of the verb ""phanai,"" meaning ""to speak."" Other descendants of ""phanai"" in English include ""apophasis"" (""the raising of an issue by claiming not to mention it""), ""euphemism,"" ""prophet,"" and the combining suffix ""-phasia"" (used to denote a speech disorder). You may also have spotted a similarity to ""emphatic,"" but that turns out to be purely coincidence; ""emphatic"" traces back to a different Greek verb which means ""to show.""] ""When I saw the transcript of that G8 conference conversation between President Bush and Prime Minister Blair, my first thought was that it read not so much like a conversation between statesmen as the phatic gruntings of a pair of teenage Kevins."" - Jane Shilling; Plenty of Chatter Masks a Dearth of Conversation; The Times (London, UK); Jul 21, 2006."
custos morum /KOOS-tohs MOH-room, -ruhm/	"noun A guardian of morals; censor. [From Latin custos morum (guardian of morals, laws, etc.).] ""A self-righteous soul can identify himself as custos morum."""
samizdat /SAH-miz-daht/	"noun An underground publishing system used to print and circulate banned literature clandestinely. Also, such literature. [From Russian samizdat, from samo- (self) + izdatelstvo (publishing house), from izdat (to publish). Coined facetiously on the model of Gosizdat (State Publishing House).] ""This remarkable little book (People Power Uli!) includes jokes, text messages, cartoons, and poems of the revolt. It is both funny and a valuable record of samizdat literature and Philippine popular culture."""
arrogate /AR-uh-geyt/	"verb 1. To claim as a right for oneself presumptuously. 2. To claim on behalf of another: to attribute or assign. [From Latin arrogatus (appropriated), past participle of arrogare, from rogare (to ask). Ultimately from the Indo-European reg- (to move in a straight line, to lead or rule) that is also the source of arrogant, regent, regime, direct, rectangle, erect, rectum, alert, source, surge, supererogatory, abrogate, and prorogue.] ""Youth fills you with optimistic thoughts, bursts with energy, and brims with confidence. It is the stage where you feel that your calling in life is to change the existing order for betterment arrogating the role of the social arbiter."""
abrogate /AB-ruh-geyt/	"noun To put aside or treat as nonexistent, especially by an authoritative act; annul. [From Latin abrogatus (repealed), past participle of abrogare (to repeal a law), from ab- (away from) + rogare (to ask, propose a law). Ultimately from the Indo-European reg- (to move in a straight line, to lead or rule) that is also the source of regent, regime, direct, rectangle, erect, rectum, alert, source, and surge.] ""I am proud to be sponsoring this amendment with the senior senator from West Virginia [Robert Byrd]. He's absolutely right that Congress has abrogated its oversight responsibilities."" - Remarks of Senator Barack Obama on the Military Commission Legislation; Sep 28, 2006."
cozen /KUHZ-uhn/	"verb To trick or deceive. [The origin of the word is not certain. It is perhaps from French cousiner, in the sense of one claiming to be a cousin to derive a benefit from the relationship. According to another theory, it is derived from obsolete Italian cozzonare, from Italian cozzone (horse trader), from Latin cocio (dealer). The word cousin is also slang for someone gullible.] ""Hobart began his career in art by cozening yokels out of unregarded treasures."" - Rhoda Koenig; Kicking A Dead Horse; The Independent (London, UK); Sep 12, 2008."
kismet \KIZZ-met\	"noun Fate. [Is it your fate to tie macrame while drinking coffee and eating sherbet in a minaret? That would be an unusual destiny, but if it turns out to be your kismet, you will owe much to Turkish and Arabic. We borrowed ""kismet"" from Turkish in the 1800s, but it ultimately derives from the Arabic ""qisma,"" meaning ""portion"" or ""lot."" Several other terms in our bizarre opening question (namely, ""macrame,"" ""coffee,"" ""sherbet,"" and ""minaret"") have roots in those languages too. In the case of ""macrame"" and ""minaret,"" there is a little French influence as well. ""Coffee"" and ""macrame"" also have Italian relations, and ""sherbet"" has an ancestor in a Persian name for a type of cold drink.] ""Penelope and Richard believed it was kismet that brought them together on that day when they met and fell in love."""
materteral /muh-TUHR-tuhr-uhl/	"adjective Characteristic of, or in the manner of, an aunt. [From classical Latin matertera (maternal aunt), from mater (mother). This word is the feminine counterpart of the word avuncular (like an uncle). The word materteral has its origin in maternal aunt, but now it could be applied to aunts on both sides, just as the word aunt originally meant paternal aunt, from Latin amita (father's sister), from amare (to love), but now applies to aunts of all kinds.] ""K and P's (Katharina and Petruchio's) first kiss, at the end of 5.1, started out merely dutiful on both sides but turned evidently passionate and went on for what seemed a very long time, and was repeated for even longer at the end of the play, as the other actors not only left the stage but cleared it of the banquet furniture and props and left the couple still glued to one another as the lights came down. Most of us smiled on with avuncular or materteral approval."" - David Evett; Shrew Productions; Shakesper; Oct 3, 1994. ""With maternal and materteral anxiety."" - W. Taylor; Monthly Review; 1823. (Quoted in the OED)"
mufti /MUHF-tee/	"noun 1. Civilian clothes, in contrast with military or other uniforms, or as worn by a person who usually wears a uniform. 2. A Muslim jurist expert in the religious law. [Mufti came into English in the late 1500s from the Arabic word of the same pronunciation. The word literally meant a person who delivers a judgment. The sense of ""civilian clothing"" arises from the legal adviser being a civil official who did not wear military garb.] ""Those on duty were dressed in the distinctive ochre uniform that has won so many admirers. However, almost the entire complement of cabin crew and pilots not rostered on were also there - in mufti - further demonstrating the sort of esprit de corps the fledgling airline has managed to engender in just 18 months."""
dapple \DAP-uhl\	"noun 1. A small contrasting spot or blotch. 2. A mottled appearance, especially of the coat of an animal (as a horse). verb To become or make dappled. adjective Marked with contrasting patches or spots; dappled. [Dapple derives from Old Norse depill, ""a spot.""]"
Albion /AL-bee-uhn/	noun archaic, poetic Britain or England
lachrymose /LAK-ruh-mohs/	"adjective Mournful or tearful. [From Latin lacrima (tear).] ""The lachrymose John Terry then delivered himself of a self-serving open letter to the fans a few days later. ... He wasn't ashamed to admit he had cried and that Wednesday night would haunt him forever."" - Pat Murphy; Shed No Tears For Chelsea; Birmingham Post (UK); May 27, 2008."
epistle /ih-PIS-uhl/	noun 1. A letter, esp. a formal or didactic one; written communication. 2. (usually initial capital letter) One of the apostolic letters in the new testament.
decretal /dih-KREET-l/	adjective 1. Pertaining to, of the nature of, or containing a decree or decrees. noun 1. A papal decree authoritatively determining some point of doctrine or church law. 2. Decretals, the body or collection of such decrees as a part of the canon law.
whilom /HWAHY-luhm/	"adjective Former; erstwhile: whilom friends. adverb Formerly. [From Middle English, from Old English hwilum (at times), plural of hwil (time).] Here is another unusual word that is a synonym of this word: quondam. ""With obvious agreement, he quotes the whilom CEO of RJR Nabisco, Ross Johnson, whose three rules of Wall Street are, 'Never play by the rules, never pay in cash, and never tell the truth.'"" - Jonathan Yardley; The Root Of All Evil; The Washington Post; Oct 6, 1991. ""The moonflower tree lofted luminous ghostly vespertine blooms, evening-glories of such prodigious perfume -- as to totally eclipse memory of the whilom little-leaved corporate ficus."" - Patti Hagan; Moonstruck: A Gardener's Lunar Awakening; The Wall Street Journal (New York); Aug 23, 1994. (vespertine: occurring in the evening.)"
exiguous /ig-ZIG-you-uhs/	"adjective Excessively scanty; inadequate. ""wrest an exiguous existence from the land"" ""exiguous evidence"""
energumen	noun 1. A person thought to be possessed by an evil spirit. 2. A fanatic or zealot.
Golconda \gol-KON-duh\	"noun A source of great wealth. [After Golconda, a ruined city in southern India, once known for its diamond mines in the nearby hills.] ""Nanotechnologies is a fancy name that excites millions of gullible simpletons who believe there's a golconda behind every rinky-dink, small company in the nano-business."" Malcolm Berko; Firm's New Battery Has Strong Negative Charge; Beacon News (Aurora, Illinois); May 23, 2007."
pother \POTH-er\	"noun 1. Commotion; uproar. 2. A heated discussion. 3. A choking or suffocating cloud, as of smoke or dust. verb To worry; bother. ""Very little will change whether that appointee is Caroline Kennedy or someone else. So why all the pother?"""
snickersnee \SNIH-ker-snee\	"noun A large knife or sword. [Back when pirates were swashbuckling around the seven seas, clashing their swords and slashing with knives, it was ""steake or snye""— that was the English variation on a Dutch term meaning ""thrust and cut."" ""Steake or snye"" was modified into ""stick or snee,"" and eventually into ""snick or snee,"" used both as a verb (""to fight with knives"") and a noun (""a fight with knives""). By 1700, the phrase had been compressed into the single word ""snickersnee."" It was still used as a verb for fighting with knives at that point, but by 1780 its use was limited primarily to a noun naming the knife used in such clashes. In modern times the word is sometimes used figuratively, as in our example sentence or in phrases like ""the snickersnee of satire.""]"
factitious \fak-TIH-shus\	"adjective 1. Produced by humans rather than by natural forces. 2. Artificial. [Like the common words ""fact"" and ""factual,"" ""factitious"" ultimately comes from the Latin verb ""facere,"" meaning ""to do"" or ""to make."" But in current use, ""factitious"" has little to do with things factual and true — in fact, ""factitious"" often implies the opposite. The most immediate ancestor of ""factitious"" is the Latin adjective ""facticius,"" meaning ""made by art"" or ""artificial."" When English speakers first adopted the word as ""factitious"" in the 17th century, it meant ""produced by human effort or skill"" (rather than arising from nature). This meaning gave rise to such meanings as ""artificial"" and ""false"" or ""feigned.""] ""'For me, this is the only real place,' David says in the novel, but for the reader the city remains disappointingly factitious."" - Say Nice Things About Detroit; The New Yorker; Aug 27, 2012."
legerity \luh-JAIR-uh-tee\	"noun Alert facile quickness of mind or body [When ""legerity"" first appeared in English in 1561, it drew significantly upon the concept of being ""light on one's feet,"" and appropriately so. It is derived from words in Middle and Old French and ultimately Latin that all mean ""light in weight."" These days, ""legerity"" can describe a nimbleness of mind as well as of the feet. A cousin of ""legerity"" in English is ""legerdemain,"" meaning ""sleight of hand"" or ""a display of skill or adroitness."" ""Legerdemain"" comes from the French phrase ""leger de main,"" meaning ""light of hand.""] ""I began to follow at the same rate, but immediately slackened speed for fear that Watts-Dunton behind us might be embittered at sight of so much youth and legerity."" - Henry Maximilian Beerbohm; No. 2 The Pines; 1914."
parol \PAIR-ul\	"noun Oral communication. [Since the 18th century, ""parol"" has been pretty much confined to oral contracts and the realm of law. No longer is anyone likely to refer to the ""sweet parols of his paramour,"" as in one 16th-century work. ""Parol"" brings to mind that other legal word, ""parole."" Both words lack any connection with law in their original form. They come from Latin ""parabola,"" which means ""parable"" or ""speech."" The Latin, in turn, is from Greek ""parabole,"" meaning ""comparison."" The French created two words (which we then borrowed) from ""parabola"": ""parol,"" meaning ""spoken words,"" and ""parole,"" for ""word of honor."" Originally, ""parole"" was a prisoner of war's promise to fulfill certain conditions on consideration of his release.] ""The Appellate Court went on to say that `Whether the mains are real or personal property is relevant since in general title to real estate cannot be transferred by parol but can only be transferred by a writing.'"" - Dan Kucera; Are Mains Real Property or Personal Property?; Water Engineering & Management (Des Plaines, Illinois); Aug 2000. ""When a grant had been made by parol the witnesses were sought out by the sheriff and returned upon the jury."" - Henry Hallam; History Of Europe During The Middle Ages; 1818."
peculation \peh-kyuh-LAY-shun\	"noun Embezzlement. [""Peculation"" derives ultimately from Latin ""peculatus,"" meaning ""misappropriation of public property,"" and ""peculator,"" meaning ""embezzler."" Both belong to a family of Latin words having to do with property and possession. The most basic members of the family are ""pecu"" (""herd, flock"") and ""pecus"" (""livestock""), animals being a fundamental form of wealth in rural society. Other members of the family include ""pecunia"" (""wealth, money""), which gave English ""pecuniary"" (""monetary""), and ""peculiaris"" (""one's own, private, special""), which lead to our ""peculiar.""]"
apothegm, also apophthegm \AP-uh-them\	"noun A short, witty, and instructive saying. ""The rare talent of compressing a mass of profound thought into an apophthegm."""
stentorian \sten-TOR-ee-uhn\	"adjective Extremely loud. [In Greek mythology, Stentor was a herald in the Trojan War and noted for his loud voice. In the Iliad, Homer described his voice to be equal to the voices of fifty men. He was put to death after his defeat by Hermes in a shouting contest.] ""Then a stentorian voice blared an all-points bulletin: 'Calling the G-men! Calling all Americans to war on the underworld!'"""
minatory \MIN-uh-tor-ee\	"adjective Threatening; menacing. ""Then, abruptly on the last page, he lapses into a kinder, gentler tone, as if wanting to leave us with a less minatory impression of himself."""
Brobdingnagian \brob-ding-NAG-ee-uhn\	"adjective Of gigantic size. [Brobdingnagian is from Brobdingnag, a country of giants in Swift's Gulliver's Travels.] ""It never ceases to amaze me how people with seemingly Brobdingnagian egos are absolutely convinced that their supreme qualities will only become apparent to the rest of the world if they are seen in a so-called luxury car bought with taxpayers' money."" - The Year 2010 and Bérenger is Prime Minister; Mauritius Times;"
conspectus \kuhn-SPEK-tuhs\	"noun A general survey, synopsis, outline, or digest of something. [From Latin conspectus, past participle of conspicere, from con- (complete) + spicere (to look). Ultimately from Indo-European root spek- (to observe) which is also the ancestor of such words as suspect, spectrum, bishop (literally, overseer), espionage, despise, telescope, spectator, and spectacles.] ""Meanwhile, for a well-informed, critical, independent-minded but essentially traditional view of the subject, we have a new conspectus [Europe's Reformations] by James D. Tracy. He is masterly in absorbing information and masterful in organizing it -- skeptical of fashion, clear in exposition, fluent in communication, unremittingly scholarly."" - Felipe Fernandez-Armesto; Real Zeal; New York Times Book Review, Jun 11, 2000."
trencherman \TREN-chuhr-muhn\	"noun A hearty eater. [Trencherman is from trencher, ""a wooden board or platter on which food is served or carved"" (from Medieval French trencheoir, from Old French trenchier, ""to cut,"" from Latin truncare, ""to lop off, to shorten by cutting"") + man. It is related to trench, ""a hole cut into the ground.""] ""In the space of the last five years, he fearlessly gained 40 pounds, displaying a trencherman's appetite for life and an admirable disdain for cardiologists and Surgeon Generals whining about moderation."""
stormy petrel \STOR-mee-PET-ruhl\	"noun 1. Any of various small sea birds having dark plumage with paler underparts. 2. One who brings discord or strife, or appears at the onset of trouble. [Stormy petrel is an alteration of earlier pitteral, probably so named in allusion to St. Peter's walking on the sea, from the fact that the bird flies close to the water in order to feed on surface-swimming organisms and ship's refuse; called stormy because in a storm the birds surround a ship to catch small organisms which rise to the surface of the rough seas; when the storm ceases they are no longer seen.] ""A colourful stormy petrel of the Conservative Party, Anthony Beaumont-Dark frequently found himself at odds with the party line in the Commons, and was well known for expressing his dissent in memorably quotable form."" - Obituary: Sir Anthony Beaumont-Dark; The Times (London, UK); Apr 4, 2006."
votary \VOH-tuh-ree\	"noun 1. One who is devoted, given, or addicted to some particular pursuit, subject, study, or way of life. 2. A devoted admirer. [Votary comes from Latin votum, ""vow,"" from the past participle of vovere, ""to vow, to devote."" Related words include vow and vote, originally a vow, hence a prayer or ardent wish, hence an expression of preference, as for a candidate.] ""The issue has been a matter of debate with strong votaries on both sides."" - Road to Basel; Financial Express (New Delhi, India); May 4, 2012."
canorous \kuh-NOR-us; KAN-or-uhs\	"adjective Melodious; musical. [From Latin canere (to sing). Ultimately from the Indo-European root kan- (to sing) which also gave us hen, canto, cantor, recant, accent, chant, enchant, and incentive. Earliest documented use: 1646.] ""The canorous sounds ... provided a cheery moment."" - Corrie Perkin; Off to an Opening in Earnest; The Australian (Sydney); Oct 13, 2008."
outre \oo-TRAY\	"adjective Unconventional; eccentric; bizarre. [Outre comes from French, from the past participle of outer, ""to exaggerate, to go beyond,"" from Latin ultra, ""beyond.""] ""The area is tamer than in its bohemian heyday, but the outre spirit survives."""
comestible \kuh-MES-tuh-buhl\	"adjective Suitable to be eaten; edible. noun Something suitable to be eaten; food. [Did you expect ""comestible"" to be a noun meaning ""food""? You're probably not alone. As it happens, ""comestible"" is used both as an adjective and a noun. The adjective is by far the older of the two; it has been part of English since at least the 1400s. (In fact, one of its earliest known uses was in a text printed in 1483 by William Caxton, the man who established England's first printing press.) The noun (which is most often used in the plural form, ""comestibles"") dates only from 1837. It made its first appearance in a novel in which a character fortified himself with ""a strong reinforcement of comestibles.""] ""This year's delegates (that's what people who attend the Oct. 25-29 [culinary] festival are called) will find a focus on comestible diversity across regions...."" — From an article by Jamila Robinson in The Atlanta Journal-Constitution, September 30, 2012 ""This rare comestible calls for specially designed platters, holders, and forks, but how well worth their acquisition!"""
sempiternal \sem-pih-TUR-nuhl\	"adjective Endless. [Sempiternal comes from Medieval Latin sempiternalis, from Latin sempiternus, a contraction of semperaeternus, from semper, ""always"" + aeternus, ""eternal.""] ""The US Postal Service might embrace sempiternal status, too, in the form of a stamp that would enable the bearer to infinitely freeze the price of first-class postage with a 'forever' stamp."" - Kathy Stevens; Post Office Hopes 'Forever' Stamp Will Deliver; The York Dispatch (Pennsylvania); Feb 27, 2007."
trice \TRYS\	"noun A very short time; an instant; a moment; -- used chiefly in the phrase ""in a trice."" [Trice is from Middle English (at a) trise, literally, ""(at one) pull,"" from trisen, ""to pull,"" from Middle Dutch trisen, ""to hoist,"" from trise, ""a windlass, a pulley.""]"
toper \TOH-puhr\	"noun One who drinks frequently or to excess. [Toper is formed from the verb tope, ""to drink,"" originally an interjection used in proposing a toast, from French tope!, ""agreed!"" from toper, ""to cover a stake in playing at dice, to accept an offer, to agree.""] ""Although he was no toper, God forbid, he took a glass of aquavit."""
stertorous \STUR-tuh-ruhs\	"adjective Characterized by a heavy snoring or gasping sound; hoarsely breathing. [Stertorous derives from Latin stertere, ""to snore.""] ""As pianist Dezso Ranki pounds and weaves at the keys, his breathing is at times so stertorous one could swear that someone in the audience is snoring."""
valetudinarian \val-uh-too-din-AIR-ee-un; -tyoo-\	"noun A weak or sickly person, especially one who is constantly or overly worried about his or her health. adjective Chronically sick or concerned about one's health. [From Latin valetudo (state of health), from valere (to be strong or well). Ultimately, from the Indo-European root wal- (to be strong), which is also the source of valiant, avail, valor, value, countervail, polyvalent, and wieldy. Earliest documented use: 1703.] ""Broadway theatre has long been known as 'the fabulous invalid', but could the old valetudinarian finally have caught a fatal cold?"" - Charles Spencer; British Theatre Will Thrive in a Downturn; The Telegraph (London, UK); Dec 10, 2008."
syncretic \sin-KRET-ik; sing-\	"adjective Combining different forms of belief or practice. [From Latin syncretismus, Greek synkretismos (union), from synkretizein (to unite in the manner of the Cretan cities), from syn (together) + Kret-, Kres (Cretan).] ""Traditionally, Indonesians practiced a tolerant, almost syncretic brand of faith, infused with the Buddhist, Hindu, and animist traditions of earlier periods."" - Barack Obama; The Audacity of Hope; Crown Publishers; 2006."
phantasmagoria \fan-taz-muh-GOR-ee-uh\	"noun 1. A shifting series or succession of things seen or imagined, as in a dream. 2. Any constantly changing scene. [Phantasmagoria is from French phantasmagorie, from phantasme, ""phantasm"" (from Greek, from phantazein, ""to make visible,"" from phantos, ""visible,"" from phainein, ""to show"") + -agorie, perhaps from Greek agora, ""assembly.""] ""David Nixon created this version of the fairy tale -- a phantasmagoria of grim goblins, dancing cushions, flying fish and magical mirrors -- for his former company, BalletMet Columbus, in 1997."""
coruscate \KOR-uh-skayt\	intransitive verb 1. To give off or reflect bright beams or flashes of light; to sparkle. 2. To exhibit brilliant, sparkling technique or style.
matutinal \muh-TOOT-nn-uhl\	"adjective Relating to or occurring in the morning; early. [From Late Latin matutinalis, from Latin matutinus (of the morning). Ultimately from Indo-European root ma- (good) that is also the source of words such as mature, matinee, matins, Spanish mañana (tomorrow, morning, future).] ""In fact, the menagerie of breakfast icons in whom we put our matutinal trust are a pretty fruity, nutty, and flakey bunch all round."" - Victor Lewis-Smith; Bit of roughage at Kellogg's; Evening Standard (London, UK); Jul 17, 2000. ""If you live in a city neighborhood and go for a morning walk, you know that one of the true delights of a matutinal stroll is the chance to check out the neighborhood trove."" - Scot Lehigh; Curb Appeal; Boston Globe (Massachusetts); May 6, 2001."
adventitious \ad-ven-TISH-uhs\,	"adjective 1. Added extrinsically; not essentially inherent. 2. (Biology) Out of the proper or usual place; as, ""adventitious buds or roots."""
concatenation \kon-kat-uh-NAY-shuhn; kuhn-\	noun A series of links united; a series or order of things depending on each other, as if linked together; a chain, a succession.
fettle \FET-l\	"noun A state or condition of fitness or order; state of mind; spirits -- often used in the phrase ""in fine fettle."""
fanfaronade \fan-fair-uh-NAYD; -NOD\	"noun 1. Swaggering; empty boasting; blustering manner or behavior; ostentatious display. 2. Fanfare. [French fanfaronnade, from Spanish fanfarronada, bluster, from fanfarron, a braggart, perhaps from Arabic farfar.] ""George Manahan made his debut this week as music director of New York City Opera, and it is difficult to imagine someone laying claim to a major podium with less of a fanfaronade."" - Justin Davidson, A Director's Toil Pays Some Dividends, Newsday, Sep 21, 1996."
torpid \TOR-pid\	adjective 1. Having lost motion or the power of exertion and feeling; numb; benumbed. 2. Dormant; hibernating or estivating. 3. Dull; sluggish; apathetic. [From Latin torpidus (numb), from torpere (to be stiff or numb). Ultimately from the Indo-European root ster- (stiff), which also gave us starch, stare, stork, starve, cholesterol, and torpedo. Earliest documented use: 1613.] “Gary is a torpid man who works as a translator for the CIA in the Washington area. He’s neither shaken nor stirred.” - Ron Charles; Life of a Spy Doomed to Rot in Place; The Washington Post; Nov 19, 2014. Torpid Hazel Dormouse
appurtenance \uh-PUR-tn-un(t)s\	noun 1. An adjunct; an accessory; something added to another, more important thing. 2. [Plural]. Accessory objects; gear; apparatus. 3. [Law]. An incidental right attached to a principal property right for purposes such as passage of title, conveyance, or inheritance.
persiflage \PUR-suh-flahzh\	"noun Light-hearted or flippant treatment of a subject; banter. [From French persiflage, from persifler (to banter), from per- (thoroughly) + siffler (to whistle or hiss), from Old French, from Late Latin sifilare, an alteration of Latin sibilare (to hiss).] ""It is derivative rather than destructive humour which presupposes serious history on which to base their persiflage."""
rapine \RAP-in\	noun The act of plundering.
lambent \LAM-buhnt\	"adjective 1. Playing lightly on or over a surface; flickering; a lambent flame; lambent shadows. 2. Softly bright or radiant; luminous; a lambent light. 3. Light and brilliant; a lambent style; lambent wit. [From Latin lambent, stem of lambens, present participle of lambere (to lick).] ""What started sometime in 1999 like a lambent flame snowballed into a big political conflagration and consequently entered a new chapter last Thursday with the decision of a faction of the party to decamp to the Alliance for Democracy (AD)."" - Tokunbo Adedoja; Plateau PDP: The Battle Enters a New Chapter; This Day (Lagos, Nigeria); May 27, 2002. ""With that, he (Richard Hawley) launches into Baby, You're My Light, a grown-up love song of delicate beauty, featuring a lambent melody and a sonorous, deep vocal."" - Alexis Petridis; Richard Hawley; The Guardian (London, UK); May 21, 2003."
purblind \PUR-blynd\	adjective 1. Having greatly reduced vision. 2. Lacking in insight or discernment.
brio \BREE-oh\	noun Enthusiastic vigor; vivacity; liveliness; spirit.
blandishment \BLAN-dish-muhnt\	noun Speech or action that flatters and tends to coax, entice, or persuade; allurement -- often used in the plural.
dissolute \DIS-uh-loot\	adjective Loose in morals and conduct; marked by indulgence in sensual pleasures or vices.
Ab ovo	adjective From the beginning.
abjure \ab-JUR\	"verb 1. To renounce, reject or repudiate. 2. To abstain from; to shun. [Just as a jury swears to produce an unbiased verdict, and a witness swears to tell the truth on pain of perjury, those who abjure their former ways ""swear them away."" ""Abjure"" (as well as ""jury"" and ""perjury"") comes from Latin ""jurare,"" which means ""to swear"" (and which in turn is based on the root ""jus,"" meaning ""law""), plus the prefix ""ab-,"" meaning ""away."" These days, we can casually abjure (that is, abstain from) vices such as smoking or overeating, but in the 15th and 16th centuries to abjure was a matter of renouncing something under oath — and sometimes a matter of life and death. For example, during the Spanish Inquisition, individuals were given the choice between abjuring unacceptable beliefs and being burned at the stake.] ""Many modern writers abjure the power of stories in their work, banish them to the suburbs of literature, drive them out toward the lower pastures of the lesser moons."" - Pat Conroy; Interpreting the World Through Story; The Writer (Waukesha, Wisconsin); Jun 2012."
forbearance (/or-BAIR-uhns/	"noun 1. Refraining from enforcing something, such as a right or a debt. 2. Tolerance, patience, restraint, or leniency. [From forbear, from Old English forberan (to endure), from for- (away) + beran (to bear).] ""Now the Buddhists are fighting back -- with good thoughts, forbearance and chanting."" - Tim Elliott; Chant of the Scrub Turkey; Sydney Morning Herald (Australia); Jun 19, 2007."
amatory \AM-uh-tawr-ee\	adjective Of or pertaining to lovers or lovemaking; expressive of love: amatory poems; an amatory look.
hale \HAYL\	adjective Free from disease and weakening conditions; healthy.
amanuensis \uh-man-yoo-EN-sis\	"noun One employed to write from dictation or to copy manuscript. [In Latin, the phrase ""servus a manu"" translates loosely as ""slave with secretarial duties."" (The noun ""manu,"" meaning ""hand,"" gave us words such as ""manuscript,"" originally meaning a document written or typed by hand.) In the 17th century the second part of this phrase was borrowed into English to create ""amanuensis,"" a word for a person who is employed (willingly) to do the important but sometimes menial work of transcribing the words of another. While other quaint words, such as ""scribe"" or ""scrivener,"" might have similarly described the functions of such a person in the past, these days we're likely to call him or her a ""secretary,"" or maybe an ""administrative assistant."" From Latin servus a manu (slave at hand[writing]), from manus (hand). Ultimately from the Indo-European root man- (hand), which also gave us manual, manage, maintain, manicure, maneuver, manufacture, manuscript, command, manque, legerdemain, manumit, and mortmain. Earliest documented use: 1619.] ""Strange to say but many writers, Wordsworth and Tennyson included, are averse to the act of writing. Once they have heard the words in their heads, an amanuensis is needed to put them down on paper."" - Frances Wilson; The Lady Vanishes; New Statesman (London, UK); Feb 6, 2014."
ontology \on-TOL-uh-jee\	"noun The philosophical study of existence and the nature of being. [From Greek onto- (being) + -logy (study). First recorded use: 1663. In the context of computer and information sciences, ontology is the formal representation of knowledge in a domain, for example, by defining classes, their attributes, and relationships.] ""But there's still that pesky problem of ontology. 'He does exist and he doesn't really exist. What does that mean?'"" - Margaret Atwood, novelist and poet (b. 1939)"
exegesis \ek-si-JEE-sis\	"noun Critical explanation or interpretation of a text or portion of a text, esp. of the Bible. [Theological scholars have long been preoccupied with interpreting the meanings of various passages in the Bible. In fact, because of the sacred status of the Bible in both Judaism and Christianity, biblical interpretation has played a crucial role in both of those religions throughout their histories. English speakers have used the word ""exegesis"" -- a descendant of the Greek term ""exegeisthai,"" meaning ""to explain"" or ""to interpret"" -- to refer to explanations of Scripture since the early 17th century. Nowadays, however, academic writers interpret all sorts of texts, and ""exegesis"" is no longer associated mainly with the Bible.] ""For his senior thesis, John wrote an exegesis of the novels of D. H. Lawrence."""
tendentious \ten-DEN-shus\	"adjective Biased. [""Tendentious"" is one of several words English speakers can choose when they want to suggest that someone has made up his or her mind in advance. You may be partial to ""predisposed"" or prone to favor ""partisan,"" but whatever your leanings, we're inclined to think you'll benefit from adding ""tendentious"" to your repertoire. A derivative of the Medieval Latin word ""tendentia,"" meaning ""tendency,"" plus the English suffix ""-ious,"" ""tendentious"" has been used in English as an adjective for biased attitudes since at least 1900.] ""The author's tendentious history of the chemical company glosses over its role in one of the most catastrophic environmental accidents in history."""
anabasis \uh-NAB-uh-sis\ plural anabases \uh-NAB-uh-seez\	"noun An expedition or an advance, especially a military one. [After Greek mercenary expedition led by Cyrus the Younger of Persia across Asia Minor in 401 BCE, described by Xenophon in his historical work Anabasis. From Greek anabainein (to go up), from ana- (up) + bainein (to go). Can you imagine anything in the world that could be common between today's word and diabetes? Both are formed from the same Greek root bainein (to go, pass, stand). The symptom of frequent urination as a result of the disease resulted in it being named diabetes, Greek for siphon. And the word diabetes derived from diabeinein (to straddle, to walk with legs apart), from dia- (across) + our old friend bainein. Another word with the same root is acrobat, from acro- (high) + bat, from bainein.] ""Between mid-November 1864 and April 1865, William Tecumseh Sherman cut his supply lines and -- against standard military orthodoxy and the advice of the president, the secretary of war and General Grant -- set off with an army of over 60,000 Midwesterners into `the bowels of the Confederacy.' `I can make Georgia howl,' he promised his superiors at the outset of the anabasis that shattered the pretensions of the secessionists and ruined the soul of the South."" - Victor Davis Hanson, Marching Through Georgia, The New York Times Book Review, Jul 29, 2001. ""From there, the sailors continued their anabasis on foot ..."" - John Dunn and Donald Stoker, Blood on the Baltic, Naval History (Annapolis, Maryland), Mar/Apr 1999."
katabasis \kuh-TAB-uh-sis\	"noun A retreat, especially a military one. [After the march of 10,000 Greeks subsequent to the death of Cyrus the Younger, related by Xenophon in his historical work Anabasis. From Greek katabasis (a going down), from katabainein (to go down). Compare with anabasis.] ""Like Western civilization itself, as his friend and chief critical promoter Harold Rosenberg sardonically remarked, De Kooning was always in decline. This katabasis is supposed to have begun in the early '50s, with the Women series."" - Robert Hughes, Seeing the Face in the Fire, Time, May 30, 1994."
brevet \bre-VET\	"noun A commission promoting a military officer to a higher rank without a corresponding increase in pay. verb tr. To promote in rank without a pay increase. adjective Having a higher rank without an increase in pay. [From Middle English, literally little letter, from Middle French, from Old French, diminutive of brief (letter), from Latin brevis (short). Other words that have descended from the same Latin root are abbreviate, abridge, brevity, breve, and brumal.] ""Fuller served in the first-ever British Tank Corps as a brevet colonel, but soon fell afoul of military brass over what he saw as its ruinous attachment to `body warfare' over the superior `brain'-driven maneuverability that the age of the tank heralded."" - Chris Lehmann, Rolling Thunder, The Washington Post, May 12, 2002"
fantod \FAN-tod\	"noun 1. A state of nervous anxiety, irritability, the willies, the fidgets. 2. A fit or emotional outburst. [Of unconfirmed origin. Perhaps an alteration of fantique (a state of anxiety) or a blend of fantasy and fatigue.] ""Of course, when we cranked the 70-horse Evinrude into life to go ripping to another part of the lake, Mr. (Izaak) Walton might have the fantods."""
idoneous \i-DO-nee-uhs\ also idonaeous	"adjective Appropriate, suitable, fit. [From Latin idoneus (fit).] ""A friend in Wyoming received a fund-raising flier from the Cheyenne Civic Center. It began, `Kudos is an idoneous name for the Cheyenne Civic Center's 1991-92 season.'"""
hobbledehoy \HOB-uhl-dee-hoy\	"noun An awkward young fellow. [Of uncertain origin.] ""Burleigh's breathless accounts of the many figures of the British peerage in the story read as though written by some overawed hobbledehoy, someone who fingers the noblemen's lamé draperies in envious amazement and wonders how much they would go for at Wal-Mart."" - Simon Winchester; 'The Nation's Attic'; The Boston Globe; Jan 11, 2004."
tor \tor\	"noun 1. A rocky heap on the top of a hill. 2. A peak of a bared hill. [From Middle English, from Old English torr. Of uncertain origin: probably from Celtic.] ""Felicity Jones is in England with her mother, who is on sabbatical to pursue intensive research into the Arthurian legend. There is speculation that Glastonbury Tor might really be Avalon, where Arthur was taken to die."""
katzenjammer \KAT-sen-jam-uhr\	"noun 1. Hangover 2. Distress; depression. 3. Confusion; clamor; uproar. [From German, from Katzen (plural of Katze, cat) + Jammer (distress, wailing).] ""Peebles, in his rejoinder, compared the intense activity in cosmology over the last few years to `a really good party.' But he also listed open questions that, he said, left him with an `uneasy feeling'--a kind of cosmic katzenjammer--about whether the concordance will survive new and more precise tests."""
betise \bay-TEEZ\ plural betises \bay-TEEZ\	"noun 1. Stupidity, foolishness. 2. A foolish remark or action. [From French bêtise (stupidity, nonsense), from bête (foolish, beast), from Old French beste (beast), from Latin bestia. A related French term is bête noire (literally, black beast), something or someone dreaded or avoided.] ""Public accountability of ministers and senior civil servants has, to put it mildly, been relaxed. If something goes badly wrong, the minister in whose orbit the betise has occurred rarely makes a public apology, let alone resigns."" - Europe: What's Wrong With Nepotism, Anyway?, The Economist (London), Mar 20, 1999. ""We say English; they say language arts. There are some resemblances between the two tongues, and `The Expository Mode of Discourse' warns against overdoing the conjunctions - a betise technically known, apparently, as an `on and on' - and tells us that the run-on sentence is still regarded as serious error."" - James Gill, When the Jargon is Impenetrable, The Times-Picayune (New Orleans, Louisiana), May 21, 1995."
sabulous \SAB-yuh-luhs\	"adjective Sandy; gritty. [From Latin sabulum (sand).] ""Clinical disorders of the lower urinary tract of cats are not new phenomena. Kirk, for example, described `retention of urine' as a very common condition in cats. He also noted that the most common cause of the problem was obstruction of the urethra by a sabulous material."" - Peter J Markwell, et al, The Effect of Diet on Lower Urinary Tract Diseases in Cats, The Journal of Nutrition (Bethesda, Maryland), Dec 1998. ""Absolutely sabulous: Sabu is caught in a giant spider web in Alexander Korda's `The Thief of Bagdad' from 1940."" - Focus Forum, The Times-Picayune (New Orleans, Louisiana), Apr 16, 1995."
eudemonia \yoo-di-MO-nee-uh\	"noun 1. A state of happiness and well-being. 2. In Aristotelian philosophy, happiness in a life of activity governed by reason. [From Greek eudaimonia (happiness), from eudaimon (having a good genius, happy), from eu- (good) + daimon (spirit, fate, fortune).] ""A Japanese delegation from the `blessed garden' city of Eniwa visited Timaru to extend its understanding of the role flower gardens play in modern urban eudemonia, among other things."" - Tom McKinlay, Tom McKinlay in Ashburton, The Press (Christchurch, New Zealand), Jan 26, 2002. ""We identify ourselves with the world of magazine publishing, yes, but we identify even more passionately with the all absorbing world of dance -- and that is perhaps the source of our strength and success. In terms of eudemonia, you might say that we have been supremely blessed. Our demons have been very good to us indeed!"" - Richard Philp, Seventy, Dance Magazine (New York), Jun 1997."
chartreuse \shahr-TROOZ, -TROOS\	"noun 1. A light, yellowish green. 2. An aromatic, usually yellow or green liqueur, originally made by Carthusian monks in Grenoble, France. adjective Having a light, yellowish green color. [From mountain to monastery to drink to color -- that's the circuitous route for this word's origin. La Grande Chartreuse, a monastery got its name after the Chartreuse Mountains. The liqueur got its name because it was first made by the monks in the monastery. Finally, the color got its name from the liqueur. Earliest documented use: 1806.] ""The tree crowns were packed together like puffballs and shimmered with every hue, tint, and shade of green: chartreuse, emerald, lime, aquamarine, teal, bottle, olive, jade."" - Douglas Preston; The El Dorado Machine; The New Yorker; May 6, 2013."
gamboge \gam-BOJ, -BOOZH\	"noun 1. A strong yellow color. 2. A gum resin obtained from the sap of trees of the genus Garcinia, used as a yellow pigment and as a cathartic. [From Latin gambogium, variant of cambugium, after Cambodia where, among other places in Southeast Asia, this tree is found.] ""In Li Nong's works, the marshy environment is shown as something mysterious, pleasant and beautiful even, and his play of tones probably spanning the repertoire of gamboge, and cadmium, with streaks of impastoes, add to the tactile quality."" - Ooi Kok Chuen; For the Zhangs, East Meets West; New Straits Times (Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia); Mar 9, 2001."
sienna \see-EN-uh\	"noun A color derived from clay, ranging from yellowish brown (in raw form) to reddish brown (when roasted). [From Italian terra di Siena (earth of Siena). After Siena, a city in Italy once noted for the mining of this mineral. In its roasted form, the color is known as burnt sienna.] ""Once you plow through the manual, you can program all your preferred settings, meaning the oven will remember just which shade of sienna you like your toast."" - Melissa Clark; Compact Cookery; The New York Times; Aug 24, 2005."
Dutch uncle	"noun Someone who advises or criticizes frankly and sternly. [The English and the Dutch have fought in many wars during the 17th and 18th century. Even though they are friendly with each other now, the English language still carries traces of the past animosity, demeaning the Dutch: from Dutch treat (where each must pay his or her own share), Dutch gold (imitation gold), Dutch courage (courage inspired by liquor), and so on. A Dutch uncle is the opposite of a typical uncle (kind and indulgent), he's not avuncular. You can be sure, he doesn't believe in nepotism.] ""George Perry is the Dutch uncle some parents wished they could send their son to -- if the boy needed some straight talk."""
cater-cousin \KAY-tuhr kuz-uhn\	"noun An intimate friend. [The origin of the term is uncertain, though various theories have been proposed. According to one, the term is derived from French quatre-cousin (fourth cousin), implying someone who is so close as to almost be a relative, or one who is close enough to be among the fourth cousins. Another idea is that the term cater-cousin alludes to people intimate enough to be catering to each other. Finally, there's the sense of cater meaning diagonally (as in catercorner).] ""I am charged with buying 30% of stocks through cater-cousin, Haggi Jalilov."" - The Advocate Disproves Statements About His Involvement; Azer-Press (Azerbaijan); Dec 22, 2005."
hie \HYE\	"verb 1. To go quickly; hasten. 2. To cause (oneself) to go quickly. [""Hie"" has been part of English since the 12th century, and it stems from the even hoarier ""higian,"" an Old English word meaning ""to strive"" or ""to hasten."" ""Hie"" enjoyed a high popularity period from the 16th to the 19th centuries, and you're sure to encounter it in the literature of those times -- writers from Shakespeare to Twain penned it into their prose. But don't get the idea that ""hie"" is just a word of the past; it regularly pops up in current publications as well -- often, though not always, in contexts in which the author is wanting to approximate an old-timey way of communicating.] ""The other week, during our morning ritual, my phone rang and I had to rush off to answer it. Talk... talk... then followed by my other pre-work activities before finally taking a bath and hieing off to work."" - Stella A. Estremera; Simple Wisdom; Philippine Sun Star (Manila, Philippines); Nov 14, 2004. ""Aniston reportedly hied out of town to meet hubby Brad Pitt in Little Rock, Ark."" - Michael Sneed; The Rice Report; Chicago Sun-Times; Nov 18, 2004."
pharisaical \far-uh-SAY-uh-kuhl\	"adjective Characterized by hypocritical self-righteousness; putting emphasis on strict observance of rituals unrelated to the spirit or meaning of the ceremony. [After the Pharisees, a Jewish sect during 1 BCE - 1 CE, whose members were noted for strict observance of rites and rituals, and felt superior because of it. The word is derived via Latin and Greek from Aramaic prishayya, plural of prish (separated).] ""Then we have the pettiness and hypocrisy in the loud and pharisaical condemnation emanating from the media and the public."" - Garth George; No Credit to be Found in Card Debacle; The Daily Post (Rotorua, New Zealand); Jun 18, 2010."
divers \DY-vuhrz\	"adjective Various; several. [From Latin diversus, from divertere (to turn aside), from di- (away, apart) + vertere (to turn). Ultimately from the Indo-European root wer- (to turn or bend) that is also the source of words such as wring, weird, writhe, worth, revert, and universe.] ""Did he alone represent France in this mysterious association, evidently composed of individuals of divers nationalities?"""
inanition \in-uh-NISH-uhn\	noun 1. Exhaustion from lack of nourishment; starvation. 2. Lack of vigor; lethargy. [1350–1400; ME < LL inānitiōn- (s. of inānitiō). See inane, -ition]
esculent \ES-kyuh-luhnt\	adjective Edible. noun Something edible, especially a vegetable. [1615–25; < L ēsculentus edible, full of food, equiv. to ēsc(a) food (cf. escarole) + -ulentus -ulent]
pulchritude \PUL-kri-tood, -tyood\	"noun Beauty. [From Latin pulchritudo, from pulcher (beautiful).] ""[Catherine Deneuve's] pulchritude is as legendary and inspiring as her body of work."" - Priya Tanna; Celebrating Catherine Deneuve; Daily News & Analysis (Mumbai, India); Apr 27, 2006."
peremptory \puh-REMP-tuh-ree\	"adjective: 1. Dictatorial. 2. Expressing command or urgency. 3. Not admitting any question or contradiction. [From Latin peremptorius (decisive), from perimere (to take away), from per- (thoroughly) + emere (to take). Ultimately from the Indo-European root em- (to take or distribute) that is also the source of words such as example, sample, assume, consume, prompt, ransom, vintage, and redeem.] ""'Easily provoked by minor irritations,' wrote Dimbleby about this period, '[Charles] became uncharacteristically impatient and peremptory.' The smallest things would prompt verbal abuse or 'sudden outbursts of rage'."""
dragoon \druh-GOON\	"verb tr. To force someone to do something; coerce. [From French dragon (dragon, to dragoon). This is a good example of how a term transferred from an object to a people to an action. Originally it referred to the firearms, either from the fact that they breathed fire like a dragon or from the shape of the pistol hammer. Eventually it began to be applied to a European cavalryman armed with a carbine. Today the term is used in the sense of forcing someone to do something against his or her will.] ""Canadians should not be dragooned into going down the same garden path. We should say no to no-fly lists."" - Ground Canada's No-fly List Now; The Gazette (Montreal, Canada); Jan 16, 2007."
quean \kween\	"noun 1. A woman regarded as being disreputable, especially a prostitute. 2. Scots. A young woman. [Middle English quene, from Old English cwene, woman.] ""A witch, a quean, an old cozening quean! Have I not forbid her my house?"" - Shakespeare, William, The Merry Wives of Windsor: Act IV, Scene II."
compellation \kom-puh-LAY-shuhn\	"noun 1. The act of addressing or designating someone by name. 2. A name; an appellation. [Latin compellatio, compellation-, from compellatus, past participle of compellare, to address.] ""That name and compellation of little Flock, doth not comfort, but deject, my Devotion ... """
Elysian \i-LIZH-uhn\	"adjective 1. Of or relating to the Elysium Fields, the abode of the blessed after death. 2. Blissful; delightful. [From Latin Elysium, from Greek elysion pedyon (Elysian plain/fields). In Greek mythology, Elysium (or the Elysian Fields) was the final resting place for the souls of heroes and the virtuous after their death. Earliest documented use: 1579.] ""Our neighbour stuck his head over the fence one arvo* and regaled me with Elysian illusions involving the company he worked for."" - Doug Anderson; Summer Job: Toilet Assembler; The Sydney Morning Herald (Australia); Jan 10, 2012 * Australian slang for 'afternoon'"
terpsichorean \turp-si-kuh-REE-uhn, turp-si-KOR-ee-uhn\	"adjective Of or relating to dancing. noun A dancer. [From Terpsichore, the Muse of dancing and choral song in Greek mythology. The word Terpsichore is the feminine form of terpsichoros (delighting in the dance), a combination of Greek terpein (to delight) and khoros (dance), which is ultimately from Indo-European root gher- (to grasp or to enclose) that's also the source of chorus, carol, choir, garth, court, and garden.] ""On the subject of Prezza: Ruskin College, Oxford, his alma mater, is no doubt bracing itself for no end of inquiries following those startling pictures of his terpsichorean skills. Where did he learn to dance?"""
Coventry \KUV-uhn-tree\	"noun A state of ostracism or exile. [After Coventry, England (possibly from the sending of Royalist prisoners there during the English Civil War).] ""Chris Ash, tribunal chairman, said the panel was not satisfied that Mrs. Edghill, of Sevenoaks, Kent, was ostracised or `sent to Coventry by other dealers'."" - Daniel Waddell; Woman City Dealer Loses Sex Discrimination Case; The Daily Telegraph; Jun 25, 1998."
lazaretto \laz-uh-RET-o\ also lazaret or lazarette \laz-uh-RET\	"noun 1. A hospital treating contagious diseases. 2. A building or ship used as a quarantine station. 3. Often lazaret. A storage space between the decks of a ship. [From Italian lazzaretto, a blend of lazzaro + Nazareto. Lazzaro is the Italian version of the name Lazarus, the name of a beggar covered in sores as described in the New Testament (Luke 16:20). Nazareto was the nickname of a hospital, after Santa Maria di Nazareth, the name of the Church on the island where it was located. Earliest documented use: 1549.] ""During times of epidemic, the government established a lazaretto on the neutral ground."" - Jason Musteen; Nelson's Refuge; Naval Institute Press; 2011. ""The Council House was a frame building, away from the rest, that had been built in the old, wilder days as a lazaretto for surly drunks."" - Kurt Vonnegut; Player Piano; Charles Scribner's Sons; 1952."
Laodicean \lay-od-i-SEE-uhn\	"adjective Lukewarm or indifferent, especially regarding religion. [After Laodicea, a city in Asia Minor, whose Christians were rebuked for their indifference to religion in Revelation 3:16 in the New Testament. Earliest documented use: 1633.] ""How can we expect such vital realism from our pathologically Laodicean political class?"""
Parthian \PAHR-thee-uhn\	"adjective 1. Of or relating to Parthia or its people, language, or culture. 2. Delivered in or as if in retreat. ""Could there be a Parthian burst of speed? Profits for the year ended last month should show a big leap off their five-year plateau."" - Lord of dullest virtue. (Britain's General Electric), The Economist, 15 Apr 1995. parthian shot: A hostile remark made in departing. [After the natives of Parthia, an ancient country in southwest Asia. Parthians were expert archers. Their specialty was shooting arrows while in (or pretending to be in) retreat which disrupted the enemy forces. The more descriptive term ""parting shot"" is a synonym.] ""'One other thing, Lestrade,' [Sherlock Holmes] added, turning round at the door: 'Rache,' is the German for 'revenge'; so don't lose your time looking for Miss Rachel.' With which Parthian shot he walked away, leaving the two rivals open-mouthed behind him."" - Arthur Conan Doyle; A Study In Scarlet; 1886."
Jeremiah \jer-uh-MY-uh/	"noun A person who complains continually, has a gloomy attitude, or one who warns about a disastrous future. [After Jeremiah, a Hebrew prophet during the seventh and sixth centuries BCE who prophesied the fall of the kingdom of Judah and whose writings (see jeremiad) are collected in the Book of Jeremiah and the Book of Lamentations. Earliest documented use: 1781.] ""Economists are pretty reluctant to forecast a recession ... perhaps because no one loves a Jeremiah."" - Shorter Cycles?; The Economist (London, UK); Sep 12, 2011. jeremiad \jer-uh-MIE-uhd\ noun A literary work or speech expressing a bitter lament or a righteous prophecy of doom. ""A year ago, in his now-famous jeremiad against Hollywood, Dole challenged Time Warner executives: `Must you debase our nation and threaten our children for the sake of corporate profits?'"""
Manichean or Manichaean \man-i-KEE-uhn\	"adjective Of or relating to a dualistic view of the world, dividing things into either good or evil, light or dark, black or white, involving no shades of gray. [After Manes/Mani (216-276 CE), Persian founder of Manichaeism, an ancient religion espousing a doctrine of a struggle between good and evil.] ""The most crucial feature of neoconservatism is its Manichean worldview, wherein the Earth is pitted in an urgent struggle between purely good and purely evil nations. As George W. Bush famously told then Sen. Joe Biden: 'I don't do nuance.'"" - Jacob Bronsther; What Do Neocons Have to Do With Obama?; The Christian Science Monitor (Boston, Massachusetts); Sep 29, 2009. ""Here the schema is too obvious, and its Manichaean contrasts of dark/light, good/evil don't resonate beyond the special effects that deliver them."" - Judith Mackrell; Wind Shadow; The Guardian (London, UK); Oct 7, 2009."
opuscule \o-PUS-kyool\	"noun A small, minor work. [Latin opusculum, diminutive of opus, work.] ""The second part of Stillman's dissertation treated the small opuscule of a Mr. Henry Dark who, while living in England before emigrating to Boston, was presumed to have been John Milton's secretary. In a short text of 1690 entitled The New Babel, Dark made America equal in status to the promised land of the Old Testament."""
virgule \VUR-gyool\	"noun A diagonal mark (/) used especially to separate alternatives, as in and/or, to represent the word per, as in miles/hour, and to indicate the ends of verse lines printed continuously, as in Old King Cole/Was a merry old soul. [French, comma, obelus, from Late Latin virgula, accentual mark, from Latin, obelus, diminutive of virga, rod.] ""Though no longer used as a British coin, the shilling still is well known throughout the world. This may explain why British printers call a virgule (a slanted line that now is common on computer keyboards) a shilling bar. Americans tend to call it a slash bar or slash."" - Weiner, Richard, This wrap is a bomb. (differences in media language between UK and US), Communication World, 1 Dec 1997."
georgic \JOR-jik\ also georgical \JOR-ji-kuhl\	"adjective Of or relating to agriculture or rural life. noun A poem concerning farming or rural life. [The adjective ""georgic,"" which dates from the first half of the 18th century, derives by way of Latin ""georgicus"" and Greek ""geōrgikos"" from the Greek noun ""geōrgos,"" meaning ""farmer."" That noun, in turn, was formed by a combination of the prefix ""geō-"" (meaning ""earth"") and ""ergon"" (""work""), the latter of which gave us words such as ""allergy"" and ""ergonomics."" There is also a noun ""georgic"" (dating from the early 16th century) which refers to a poem that deals with the practical aspects of agriculture and rural affairs. The standard for such poems, Virgil's Georgics, is responsible for its name. That poem, written between 37 and 30 B.C., called for a restoration of agricultural life in Italy after its farms fell into neglect during civil war.] ""During the last decade of the 1800s, the georgic rhythms and methods of cultivation continued very much as they had when Thomas Jefferson was president."" — From Dennis K. Boman's 2012 book The Original Rush Limbaugh: Lawyer, Legislator, and Civil Libertarian"
misoneism \mis-uh-NEE-izm\	"noun A hatred or fear of change or innovation. [From Italian misoneismo, from Greek miso- (hate) + neos (new). Ultimately from the Indo-European root newo- (new) that also gave us new, neo-, neon, novice, novel, novelty, innovate, and renovate.] ""The prevailing attitude was therefore one of extreme conservatism: may I indeed say of misoneism?"""
algolagnia \algoe-LAG-nee-uh\	"noun Sexual gratification derived from inflicting or experiencing pain. [New Latin : algo- + Greek lagneia, lust (from lagnos, lustful).] ""Nurse Wolf was my name for this queen of algolagnia - of pleasure from pain. She gave pleasure by inflicting it, she got pleasure from causing it."""
pilose \PIE-loas\ also pilous \-luhs\	"adjective Covered with fine, soft hair. [Latin pilosus, from pilus, hair.] ""Because the heavily forested blonds have thin hairs, and the less abundantly pilose redheads have thick, coarse hairs, the total weight of all the hairs on their heads is about the same."""
pizzicato \pit-si-KA-toe\	"adjective Played by plucking rather than bowing the strings. noun A pizzicato note or passage. [Italian, past participle of pizzicare, to pluck, from pizzare, to prick, from pizzo, point.] ""The band employs a violinist and accordionist, and both are masters of their instruments' diverse qualities - a gentle middle-Eastern drone here, some pizzicato offbeat there."""
piacular \pie-AK-yuh-luhr\	adjective Making or requiring atonement. [From Latin piare (to appease). Earliest documented use: 1606.] “The piacular sacrifice took place several days later.” - Colleen McCullough; Fortune’s Favourites; William Morrow; 1993.
kleptocracy \klep-TOK-ruh-see\	"noun A government characterized by rampant greed and corruption. [Greek kleptein, to steal + -cracy.] ""Daniel and President Kabila are from the same town and tribe. The Congo was a great traditional kleptocracy, made that way under colonial rule, with Mobutu Sese Seko as its last, most grotesque beneficiary."""
misogamy \mi-SOG-uh-mee\	"noun Hatred of marriage. [From Greek miso- (hate) + -gamy (marriage). Earliest recorded use: 1560.] ""Misogamy drives the plot. Marriage itself is seen as a series of ratty exchanges in which partners gnaw at past infidelities."" - Michael Billington; Blithe Spirit; The Guardian (London, UK); Aug 26, 2004."
ailurophile \eye-LOOR--uh-fyle, ay-LOOR-\	"noun One who loves cats. [Greek ailouros, cat + -phile.] ""It's said in publishing that no cat book ever loses money. Maybe it's true: bibliophiles tend to be ailurophiles, and both are tenacious breeds."" - Toth, Emily, Meow mix, Women's Review of Books, 1 Jul 1995."
tribune \TRIB-yoon, tri-BYOON\	"noun 1. An officer of ancient Rome elected by the plebeians to protect their rights from arbitrary acts of the patrician magistrates. 2. A protector or champion of the people. [Middle English, from Old French tribun, from Latin tribunus, from tribus, tribe.] noun A raised platform or dais from which a speaker addresses an assembly. [French, from Old French, part of a church, speaking platform, from Old Italian tribuna, from Medieval Latin tribuna, alteration of Latin tribunal.] ""Cola di Rienzi became the champion of the people and tried to revive the ancient Roman institutions, as envisaged also by Petrarch and Dante; in 1347 he was made tribune, but his dreams were doomed."""
picayune \pik-uh-YOON\	"adjective 1. Of little value or significance. 2. Petty, small-minded. noun 1. A Spanish-American coin equal to half the value of a real (a silver coin). 2. A small coin, especially a five-cent piece. 3. Something or someone of little value. [From French picaillon, from Provençal picaioun, a small coin. The Times-Picayune and the Picayune-Item are so named because they could then be bought for a few cents, or because they originated from the town of the same name. The former publication raises its flag in New Orleans, Louisiana, while the latter calls Picayune, Mississippi its home. Incidentally, did you notice the two newspaper names are near-anagrams?] ""One could criticize the book as having a progovernment bias, but such criticism would be picayune and, I believe, wrong."" - F. Frederick Hawley; Terrorism in America; Social Forces; Mar 1, 1995. ""Well, it is not supposed to be good form these days to dwell on the picayune personal problems, especially of Republicans, but, you know, I've never been much for form. So, of the speaker, Gingrich's three recent personal problems - his mother, his historian and his book - the book is potentially, I think, the most serious."" - Dan Schorr; Reality Sets in for New Congress, Weekend Edition; NPR; Jan 14, 1995."
scupper \SKUP-uhr\	"noun 1. An opening in the side of a ship at deck level to allow water to run off. 2. An opening for draining off water, as from a floor or the roof of a building. [Middle English scoper akin to possibly akin to scope, scoop.] ""Roof life and effectiveness are prolonged by clean drains, water-tight flashing, scuppers to relieve overworked drains following downpours and controlled numbers of perforations."""
limpet \LIM-pit\	"noun 1. Any of various low conical-shelled marine mollusks that adhere tightly to rocks. 2. One that clings stubbornly. [From Middle English lempet, from Latin lampreda (lamprey).] ""If your child becomes a limpet, the teacher will peel him off your leg."" - Kevin Harcombe; Learning to Let Go; The Guardian (London, UK); Sep 2 2008."
brasserie \bras-uh-REE, bras-REE\	"noun A restaurant serving alcoholic beverages, especially beer, as well as food. [French, from brasser, to malt, brew, from Old French bracier, from Vulgar Latin *braciare, from Latin brace, malt, of Celtic origin.] ""The interview over, we retired to a brasserie just across the street from the entrance to the Morris' courtyard."""
belles-lettres \bel-LET-ruh\	"noun Literary works valued for their aesthetic qualities rather than information or instruction. [From French belles (fine) + lettres (letters, literature).] ""Unlike official or traditional poetry, the poetry of survival is not made up of consolations but of solutions. Unlike our belles-lettres, this book is fact-dependent, not word-dependent."""
pseudepigrapha \soo-di-PIG-ruh-fuh\	"noun 1. Spurious writings, especially writings falsely attributed to biblical characters or times. 2. A body of texts written between 200 B.C. and A.D. 200 and spuriously ascribed to various prophets and kings of Hebrew Scriptures. [Greek, from neuter pl. of pseudepigraphos, falsely ascribed : pseudes, false. pseudo- + epigraphein, to inscribe : epi-, epi- + graphein, to write.] ""What is interesting, however, is that, despite his ignorance of things biblical, Mr. Redfield has unwittingly placed himself in a long tradition of pseudepigrapha -- that is, of post-biblical writings, many indeed composed in Aramaic, that have been spuriously attributed by their authors to various biblical characters and periods."" - Philologos, On Language, Forward, 12 Aug 1994."
libretto \li-BRET-oe\	"noun 1. The text of a dramatic musical work, such as an opera. 2. A book containing such a text. [Italian, diminutive of libro, book, from Latin liber, libr-.] ""Maxwell Davies's libretto is in the best British ghost-story tradition."""
victualer also victualler \VIT-l-uhr\	"noun 1. A supplier of victuals; a sutler. 2. Chiefly British. An innkeeper. 3. Nautical. A supply ship. ""Philip Morris, whose Kraft General Foods is top Yankee victualer on the global scene, recorded $9.4 billion in food salesabroad last year."""
cellarer \SEL-uhr-uhr\	"noun A person, as in a monastic community, who is responsible for maintaining the supply of food and drink. [Middle English celerer, from Old French, from Latin cellarius, steward, from cella, storeroom.] ""Firm in time he is out of date-- like a cellarer for altar wines tasting many summers in one glass ... """
gourmand \goor-MAHND, GOOR-muhnd\	"noun 1. A lover of good food. 2. A gluttonous eater. [Middle English gourmant, glutton, from Old French gormant.] ""Not only had Alice long since recovered, but he was discovering the downside of being identified as a gourmand: Food fanatics were collecting around him like crows."""
palsy-walsy \pal-zee-WAL-zee\	"adjective Slang. Having or appearing to have the close relationship of chums. [Reduplication of palsy alteration of pally.] ""But melodrama, an iffy proposition at best, requires more discipline than is evidenced by this palsy-walsy crew, whose acting styles range from moustache-twirling to half-baked naturalism."" - F. Kathleen Foley, Theater Beat; Taking an Obscure 'New York' Over Top; Home Edition, Los Angeles Times, 9 May 1997."
pollard \POL-uhrd\	"noun 1. A tree cut back to the trunk to encourage a dense growth of new branches. 2. An animal that has its horns or antlers removed or has shed them. verb tr. To cut off the top of a tree. [From Middle English polle (head).] ""'Here because the sidewalks are so narrow, we pollard mulberry trees to keep them small so they don't obstruct passing buses,' Dimitris Papademas said."""
arborescent \ahr-buh-RES-uhnt\	"adjective Having the size, form, or characteristics of a tree; treelike. [Latin arborescens, arborescent-, present participle of arborescere, to grow to be a tree, from arbor, tree.] ""Because he considers creation in the image of God to be the ultimate pedestal, (Stephen Jay) Gould judges Darwinism to be the ultimate pedestal-smasher because it proves that humans are merely `a fortuitous cosmic afterthought, a tiny little twig on the enormously arborescent bush of life.'"""
coppice \KOP-is\	"noun A thicket or grove of small trees or shrubs, especially one maintained by periodic cutting or pruning to encourage suckering, as in the cultivation of cinnamon trees for their bark. [Old French copeiz.] ""`There will be no gravestones and land management will be governed by sound ecological principles,' says Mr Bradfield. `People will be encouraged to use shrouds instead of coffins. Stretchers could be made from coppice poles cut from woodland, which would allow friends and relatives to do something physical and creative together.' - Marina Cantacuzino, A natural place to be buried: Forget cemeteries, you can, Independent, 26 May 1994."
bosky \BOS-kee\	"adjective 1. Having an abundance of trees or shrubs. 2. Of or relating to woods. [""Bosk,"" ""busk,"" ""bush"" — in Middle English these were all variant spellings of a word meaning ""shrub."" ""Bush"" is still familiar to the modern ear, and ""busk"" can still be heard in a few places in the dialects of northern Britain. ""Bosk"" too survived in English dialects, although it disappeared from the written language, and in the early 17th century it provided the root for the woodsy adjective ""bosky."" Since its formation, ""bosky"" has been firmly rooted in our language, and its widespread popularity seems to have resurrected its parental form. By 1815 ""bosk"" (also spelled ""bosque"") had reappeared in writing, but this time with the meaning ""a small wooded area.""] ""And with each end of thy blue bow dost crown My bosky acres, and my unshrubb'd down,"" - Shakespeare, William, Tempest, The: Act IV."
topiary \TOE-pee-er-ee\	"noun The art of creating sculptures by clipping, trimming, and training plants. Also, such a sculpture or garden. adjective Of or related to a tree or garden shaped in such a way. [From Latin topiarius (ornamental gardener), from topia (ornamental gardening), from Greek topos (place).] ""But Warriors players won't say why they've made a mutual pact to let their facial topiary run wild."""
onomancy \ON-uh-man-see\	"noun Divination by the letters of a name. [From Greek onoma- (name) + -mancy (divination). Earliest recorded use: 1603. Some parents name their children after careful consideration of onomancy to assure the best possible future for them. Some people alter the spelling of their names or adopt a new name in an effort to bring good fortune. Science fiction writer Isaac Asimov wrote a short story, ""Spell My Name with an S"", with this theme. The story was inspired by his frustration in having to ask people to spell his name (pronounced AZ-uh-mof) correctly.] ""Kaplan and Bernays taught me all sorts of unexpected things about my name. They inspired me to try my hand at alphanumeric onomancy, in which the letters of a name are assigned numerical value, then added up to reveal occult facts about its owner."" - Adam Goodheart; Naming Names: An Appellation Spring; The Washington Post; Feb 3, 1997."
posology \puh-SOL-uh-jee, po-\	"noun The study of drug dosages. [From Greek poso- (how much) + -logy (study). Earliest recorded use: 1786. Physician Peter Mere Latham once said, ""Poisons and medicine are oftentimes the same substance given with different intents."" And different dosage, he might have added. Determining the right amount -- neither too much nor too little -- is crucial as the effect of a medicine varies by age, weight, sex, climate, etc. of the recipient. That's where posology comes in.] ""Dan Wagner's approach involves working with a team of students, professors, local healers, midwives, and shamans to identify, collect, and mark plant samples according to protocols established in the field of posology."""
simony \SY-muh-nee, SIM-\	"noun Profiting from holy things, especially buying and selling of holy positions and pardons. [After Simon Magus, Samaritan sorcerer in the Bible, who wanted to buy spiritual powers -- the ability to transfer the ""Holy Spirit"" by putting hands on someone -- from Peter.] ""A related theme -- the preacher or moraliser unmasked -- has been richly illustrated in recent years by examples from real life: a string of corrupt American televangelists, self-appointed 'men of God', who revelled in greed, lust, and simony, the very things they were thought to be railing against."""
pareidolia	noun The imagined perception of a pattern or meaning where it does not actually exist, as in considering the moon to have human features.
cernuous \SURN-you-uhs, SUR-noo-\	adjective Botany. Drooping, as a flower; nodding.
comminate \KOM-uh-nayt\	"verb tr. To threaten with divine punishment; to curse. [Back-formation from commination, from com- (intensive prefix) + minari (to threaten). Ultimately from the Indo-European root men- (project), which is also the source of minatory, menace, mountain, eminent, promenade, demean, amenable, and mouth. Earliest recorded use: 1611.] ""I think he deserves comminating, don't you? Nancy said people like that ought to be put down, didn't you, Nancy?"" - Mollie Hardwick; Malice Domestic; Fawcett; 1992."
psephology \see-FAH-luh-jee\	"noun The study of elections and voting, and their statistical analysis in the prediction of results. [From Greek psephos (pebble) + -logy (study). Why a pebble in a word for predicting election results? That's because ancient Greeks used pebbles as ballots to register votes in elections. In fact, that's where the word ballot comes from. A ballot is, literally, a little ball (diminutive of Italian balla). Psephocracy is the word for a government decided by election.] ""The science of interpreting elections has a fancy name: psephology. A shorter, simpler and more accurate title for much election analysis is: fiction."" - David S. Broder; Psephology Finds Only Voter Indifference; Austin American Statesman (Texas); Sep 16, 1989. ""In fact, with the exception of the foreign film and documentary categories, chosen by more elite committees, each is a postal vote of the 5,600-strong membership, a vote superintended by PricewaterhouseCoopers, though voting majority and turnout records are not disclosed. There is no such thing as psephology on Oscar night."" - Peter Bradshaw; Oscars 2003: This Hypnotic Spectacle; The Guardian (London, UK); Mar 21, 2003."
elide \ih-LAHYD\	verb tr. 1. To omit (a vowel, consonant, or syllable) in pronunciation. 2.To suppress; omit; ignore; pass over. 3. Law. To annul or quash. [1585–95; < L ēlīdere to strike out, equiv. to ē- e- + -līdere, comb. form of laedere to wound.]
provender \PROV-uhn-der\	"noun 1. Dry food used as livestock feed. 2. Food or provisions. [From Middle English provendre, from Old French, alteration of provende, from Medieval Latin provenda, alteration of praebenda. Ultimately from Indo-European root ghebh- (to give or receive) that gave us give, debt, duty, habit, endeavor, able, inhibit, and malady.] ""Last year nearly 34,000 people were involved in the urban gardening program. It's an impressive figure to be sure, but according to the county agent, the very process of tilling and watering may be more important than the provender."""
pungle \PUNG-gul\	"verb To make a payment or contribution of money -- usually used with up. [""Pungle"" is from the Spanish word ""pongale,"" meaning ""put it down,"" which itself is from ""poner,"" meaning ""to put"" or ""to place,"" or more specifically ""to contribute money."" The earliest uses of ""pungle"" are from the 1850s and are in reference to anteing up in games of chance. It did not take long for the word to be used in other contexts. It was in Huckleberry Finn's deadbeat dad's vocabulary: ""I'll make [Judge Thatcher] pungle, too, or I'll know the reason why,"" Huck quotes his father in Mark Twain's famous novel. Nowadays, ""pungle"" is mainly used in the western part of the United States.] ""Congress pungled up $700 billion for a bailout."" - Steve Rubenstein; 2008 in Review; San Francisco Chronicle; Dec 30, 2008."
ululate \ULL-yuh-layt\	"verb Howl, wail. [""Ululate"" descends from the Latin verb ""ululare."" That Latin root carried the same meaning as our modern English word, and it likely originated in the echoes of the rhythmic wailing sound associated with it. Even today, ""ululate"" often refers to ritualistic or expressive wailing performed at times of mourning or celebration or used to show approval.] ""The puppy ululated in distress every time he was left alone."""
Gedankenexperiment	"noun A thought experiement. [Gedanken means ""thoughts"" in German. The term was popularized by Albert Einstein, who applied gedankenexperiment to his work conceptualizing the theory of relativity.]"
plenipotentiary \plen-uh-puh-TEN-shee-er-ee, -shuh-ree\	"noun A person, such as a diplomatic agent, fully authorized to represent a government. adjective Invested with full power. [Since the mid-17th century a plenipotentiary has been ""a person and especially a diplomatic agent invested with full power to transact business"". (In Latin, plenus means full; potent means powerful). The term is rarely used these days in regular communication, but it endures in the diplomatic corps, where the minister plenipotentiary ranks below ambassador.] ""On Wednesday, Blair officially resigned as Britain's prime minister and immediately took on the role of senior plenipotentiary for the so-called Middle East Quartet -- the United States, the United Nations, the European Union and Russia."""
buttle \BUT-l\	"verb intr. To do a butler's work. [Back-formation from butler, from Old French bouteillier (cup-bearer), from bouteille (bottle). Originally, a butler was in charge of the wine. Earliest recorded use: 1867.] ""The top hotels in Saudi Arabia are staffed by foreign men -- something I realized must be the case when my butler at the Al Faisaliah folded my underwear unprompted. If I were buttled by a Saudi, we'd probably be shuttled to Deera Square -- or Chop Chop Square, as it's better known -- where the public beheadings occur."""
cicerone \sis-uh-RO-nee, chee-che-RO-nee\	"noun A tour guide. [After Marcus Tullius Cicero (106-43 BCE), the Roman statesman, orator, and writer, who was known for his knowledge and eloquence. He's one of the rare people who have given two eponyms to the English language. Another word coined after his name is ciceronian, meaning marked by ornate language, expansive flow, and forcefulness of expression.] ""Could one entirely rely upon a reporter who assured his readers that the people of Valencia in general were perfidious, vindictive, sullen, mistrustful, fickle, treacherous and empty of all good? Laugh with him, certainly, in the hearty old days of political incorrectness, but have reservations about him as a cicerone."""
fossick \FAH-sik\	"verb 1 Australian & New Zealand To search for gold or gemstones typically by picking over abandoned workings. 2 chiefly Australian & New Zealand a) To search about; rummage. b) To search for by or as if by rummaging; ferret out. [The first people to ""fossick"" (in the oldest but still-current meaning of the word), back in the 1850s, were picking over abandoned mining excavations in search of gold or gemstones. But within a few decades ""fossick"" was being used more generally to mean ""to search about"" or ""to rummage."" ""Fossick"" was brought to the shores of Australia and New Zealand by immigrants from the United Kingdom. The word was originally an English dialect term meaning ""to ferret out."" That meaning is derived from older words: the first spelled ""fussick,"" meaning ""to bustle about,"" and the second ""fossack"" or ""fussock,"" meaning ""a troublesome person.""] ""As teenagers, the twins spent many summer afternoons fossicking for opals in the old mine."""
precentor \prih-SEN-ter\	"noun A leader of the singing of a choir or congregation. [The history of ""precentor"" leads to the Latin verb ""praecinere,"" meaning ""to lead in singing,"" which was formed by adding the ""prae-"" prefix to the verb ""canere"" (""to sing""). ""Canere"" is also an ancestor of the English word ""chant,"" as well as the source of the Latin noun ""cantor,"" which was also borrowed into English and is used both as a synonym of ""precentor"" and for an individual in a synagogue who sings or chants the liturgical music and leads the congregation in prayer.] ""He was deeply devoted to our congregation, and served as precentor at the church for the last 20 years of his life."""
miry \MYR-ee\	"adjective 1. Resembling mire. 2. Muddy; swampy. [From mire (bog), from Old Norse myrr. Earliest recorded use: 1398.] ""This election night, American liberals, sternum-deep in that miry slough of despond, are as depressed as they've been since the Florida debacle back in 2000."" - Michael Tomasky; Midterms 2010: A Sea-Change in Just Two Years; The Guardian (London, UK); Nov 3, 2010."
escheat \es-CHEET\	"noun 1. The reversion of property to the state or crown in case of no legal heirs. 2. Property that has reverted to the state or crown. verb tr. and intr. To revert or cause to revert property. [From Middle English eschete, from Old French eschete, from Vulgar Latin excadere, from Latin ex- + cadere (to fall).] ""New York escheats most dormant assets after five years, which is about average. Some states, such as Iowa, take most assets after three years; others, such as Pennsylvania, wait seven."""
portmanteau \port-MAN-to, -TOH, PORT-\	"noun 1. A word coined by blending two or more words. 2. A case opening in two parts, used for carrying clothes while traveling. [From French portemanteau, from porter (to carry) + manteau (coat, mantle). Originally a portmanteau was a court official who carried the robes of a king. Since a portmanteau had two hinged compartments, Lewis Carroll used the word to describe a blended word in his book ""Through the Looking-Glass"" (1871). While explaining the poem Jabberwocky, Humpty Dumpty tells Alice: ""Well, 'slithy' means 'lithe and slimy'. 'Lithe' is the same as 'active'. You see it's like a portmanteau -- there are two meanings packed up into one word."" Some everyday portmanteaux are brunch (breakfast + lunch), smog (smoke + fog), and motel (motor + hotel). Some more examples are adultescent, bumbershoot, mingy.] ""Montreal's annual Fantasia Film Festival has come a long way since its beginnings in 1996. A portmanteau of 'fantasy' and 'Asia', the festival's name once reflected the programmers' focus."" - ""Montreal's annual Fantasia Film Festival has come a long way since its beginnings in 1996. A portmanteau of 'fantasy' and 'Asia', the festival's name once reflected the programmers' focus."" Al Kratina; Fantasia's Past is Present on DVD; Montreal Gazette (Canada); Jul 4, 2008."
in situ \in SY-too, SEE-, -tyoo, -choo\	"adverb In the original place. [From Latin in situ (in place). The word is used in medicine to indicate a condition in a localized state, not spread beyond. First recorded use: 1740.] ""The sound engineers came to record the nuns in situ."""
wherefore \HWAIR-for\	"adverb For what reason? noun Reason or purpose. [From Middle English, a combination of where + for. The word often appears in the phrase ""the whys and wherefores (of something)"", meaning its reasons. First recorded use: c. 1200.] ""Love is the most dunderheaded of all the passions; it never will listen to reason. The very rudiments of logic are unknown to it. 'Love has no wherefore,' says one of the Latin poets."""
ex gratia \eks GRAY-shee-uh\	"adverb, adjective As a favor or gesture of goodwill, rather than from any legal requirement. [From Latin ex (out of) + gratia (favor, kindness). First recorded use: 1769. When they say they are making a payment ex gratia, it is more often than not, not ex gratia, but because of their culpability.] ""Lumka Oliphant said, 'The payment of Rand 1000 is made ex gratia as Roadlink is indemnified by our terms and conditions.'"""
therewithal \thair-with-ALL\	"adverb Together with; besides. [From there + withal, from the joining of the phrase ""with al"" (with all). First recorded use: c. 1330.] ""A festive Bazaar invites one and all to sample its selection of well-chosen words, therewithal, with imagination and inspiration to create stories and greeting cards."" - This Week's Arts Round-up; The Cornishman (Cornwall, UK); Dec 10, 2009."
fetor \FEE-ter\ also foetor	"noun A strong offensive odor; stench. [From Latin fetor, from fetere (to stink).] ""Just imagine yourself trying to pick out fresh fruit while your olfactory nerve is bombarded with the fetor of a bait shop run by some flea-bitten old coot called Gooey."""
frabjous \FRAB-juhs\	"adjective Wonderful, elegant, superb, or delicious. [Coined by Lewis Carroll in ""Through the Looking-Glass""; perhaps meant to suggest fabulous or joyous.] ""Ah, my friends, rejoice. These are frabjous days."" - Ivins, Molly, Needed: one strong stomach, The Progressive, 1 Mar 1995."
alterity \awl-TAIR-uh-tee\	"noun Otherness; specifically the quality or state of being radically alien to the conscious self or a particular cultural orientation. [You’re probably familiar with the verb ""alter,"" meaning ""to make or become different,"" and you may not be surprised to learn that it is a relative of ""alterity."" Both words descend from the Latin word ""alter,"" meaning ""other (of two)."" That Latin ""alter,"" in turn, comes from a prehistoric Indo-European word that is also an ancestor of our ""alien."" ""Alterity"" has been used in English as a fancy word for ""otherness"" (""the state of being other"") since at least 1642. It remains less common than ""otherness"" and tends to turn up most often in the context of literary theory or cultural studies.] ""The novel focuses on the alterity experienced by adolescents, exploring how they both value and fear it."""
tu quoque \TOO-KWOH-kwee\	"noun A retort charging an adversary with being or doing what he or she criticizes in others. [A typical tu quoque involves charging your accuser with whatever it is you've just been accused of rather than refuting the truth of the accusation -- an evasive strategy that may or may not meet with success. The term has been active in the English language for about 400 years and has been put to use by a number of English writers, including C.S. Lewis, who penned, ""your condemnation of my taste is insolent; only manners deter me from a tu quoque."" The term is Latin in origin and translates as ""you too,"" although the translation ""you're another"" is sometimes used as well (as in our second example sentence). ""Tu quoque"" functions in English as a noun, but it's often used attributively to modify other nouns, as in ""a tu quoque argument.""] ""A good debater recognizes that resorting to a tu quoque only weakens one's position in the argument."""
shamus \SHAH-muhs, SHAY-\	"noun 1. A private detective. 2. A police officer. [Perhaps from Yiddish shames/shammes (sexton, a caretaker at a synagogue), from Hebrew shamash (servant). The spelling of the word has altered from the influence of the Celtic name Seamus (equivalent to James) as many police officers in the US at the time, especially in New York, were Irish. First recorded use: 1925.] ""A private eye is expected to be whip-smart and tough as nails, but if the guy isn't likable, he's D.O.A. as a genre hero. So it's nice to note that Vlodek Elstrom, a shamus from a tumbledown town in northern Illinois has lost none of his initial appeal in its sequel."" - Marilyn Stasio; A Need for Noir; The New York Times; Jan 23, 2009."
noodge or nudzh or nudge \nooj\	"verb tr.: To pester; to nag. verb intr.: To whine. noun: One who pesters and annoys with persistent complaining. [From Yiddish nudyen (to pester, bore), from Polish nudzic. The word developed a variant spelling 'nudge' under the influence of the English word 'nudge'. A cousin of this word is nudnik (a boring pest). First recorded use: 1960.] ""Rahm Emanuel is willing to be a relentless noodge to keep the herd moving in the right direction."""
schmeer or schmear or shmear \shmeer\	"noun 1. The entire set (as in the whole schmeer). 2. Bribe or flattery. 3. Spread or paste. verb tr To butter up: to flatter or bribe. [From Yiddish schmirn (to smear, grease, or flatter), from Middle High German smiren. Earliest recorded use: 1958. Literally speaking, to schmeer is to smear, cream cheese on a bagel, for example. The term is also used in many metaphorical senses: to flatter or bribe someone. Many languages have similar terms. In English we have: ""to grease someone's palm"" (to bribe) and ""to butter someone up"" (to flatter). There's another metaphorical sense in English that makes use of schmeer's cousin, smear, as in ""to smear someone's reputation"".] ""All three of the women sharing the bill have extensive TV experience -- HBO and Comedy Central specials, Letterman, Leno, the whole shmear."""
golem \GO-luhm, -lem\	"noun 1. An automaton. 2. A blockhead. [From Yiddish goylem, from Hebrew golem (shapeless mass). First recorded use: 1897. In Jewish legend a golem was a human-like figure brought to life supernaturally. The most famous of these golem stories is of the golem of Prague, in which a 16th century rabbi created a golem to protect the Jews from anti-Semitic attacks.] ""I've created a golem that will continue to live, no matter what I do. Books get burnt and websites disappear, but my e-mail accounts continue to get spammed."""
grok \grok\	"verb tr. Slang. To understand deeply and intuitively. [""Grok"" may be the only English word that derives from Martian. Yes, we do mean the language of the planet Mars. No, we're not getting spacey; we've just ventured into the realm of science fiction. ""Grok"" was introduced in Robert A. Heinlein's 1961 science fiction novel Stranger in a Strange Land. The book's main character, Valentine Michael Smith, is a Martian-raised human who comes to earth as an adult, bringing with him words from his native tongue and a unique perspective on the strange, strange ways of earthlings. ""Grok"" was quickly adopted by the youth culture of America and has since peppered the vernacular of those who grok it.] ""Any first-time Apple user immediately groks the nature of the device."" - Melvin Bukiet; Me and My Mac; The Chronicle of Higher Education (Washington, DC); Oct 16, 2011."
Widdiful \wIdIfUl\	"noun Somebody who deserved to be hanged. [The story behind it starts with the northern English and Scottish word ""widdy"" or ""widdie"", the local forms of the standard English ""withy"", a flexible branch from a tree such as willow used to make baskets or to tie or fasten things together. One sense was of a band or rope made of intertwined withies. Later it came to mean a halter and in particular a hangman's rope. To cheat the widdy meant to escape hanging. By an obvious process of transfer the sense of gallows-bird grew up, one destined to fill a widdy.] ""'Will you shut the bloody noise off, you bloody widdiful!' Philips said in a shout that was nearly a scream."""
McGuffin	The trigger for a story, the pretext on which the action depends that is used to catch the attention of the audience, but which isn’t important or relevant to the plot. It’s merely a catalyst, what one writer has called a “indispensable inconsequentiality”.
schmegeggy or schmegegge \shmuh-GEG-ee\	"noun 1. A stupid person. 2. Nonsense. [Formed on the pattern of other Yiddish words starting with schm-, for example, schmuck. First recorded use: 1964.] ""Dr. Eric Kandel*: I was a schmegeggy. To think that each one of these complex mental structures had a single locale and that I could find them in six months was absurd. I learned to be more realistic."" - Claudia Kalb; Interview: Biology of the Mind; Newsweek (New York); Mar 27, 2006. ""What did you have to do with it? Your parents were Mormon. What kind of schmegeggy is this?"" - Jess Stearn; Soulmates; Bantam; 1984."
bruit \broot\	verb tr To voice abroad; rumor (used chiefly in the passive and often followed by about): The report was bruited through the village. noun Medicine/Medical. Any generally abnormal sound or murmur heard on auscultation. [1400–50; late ME (n.) < AF, OF, n. use of ptp. of bruire to roar < VL *brūgere, a conflation of L rūgīre to bellow and VL *bragere; see bray]
ploce \PLO-see\	"noun The repetition of a word or phrase for rhetorical emphasis or for extended meaning. [From Latin ploce, from Greek ploke (plaiting), from plekein (to plait).] ""Why wilt thou sleep the sleep of death?"" - William Blake ""Make war upon themselves - brother to brother / Blood to blood, self against self."" - Shakespeare"
paralipsis \par-uh-LIP-sis\ plural paralipses \-seez\	"noun Drawing attention to something while claiming to be passing over it. [From Late Latin paralipsis, from Greek paraleipsis (an omission), from paraleipein (to leave on one side), from para- (side) + leipein (to leave). Paralipsis is especially handy in politics to point out an opponent's faults. It typically involves these phrases: ""not to mention"" ""to say nothing of"" ""I won't speak of"" ""leaving aside""] ""Political correctness has breathed new life into the paralepsis, the rhetorical device whereby we make a statement by first announcing that we are not going to make it. When pundits write 'No one is suggesting...' the American eye reads 'I'm suggesting.'"""
antiphrasis \an-TIF-ruh-sis\	"noun The humorous or ironic use of a word or a phrase in a sense opposite of its usual meaning. For example: ""Brutus is an honorable man."" -Antony in Julius Caesar (Shakespeare) [From Late Latin, from Greek antiphrazein (to express by the opposite), from anti- + phrazein (to speak).] ""He was murmuring something between lips decorated by a little mustache, which gave a sarcastic touch to his clerk-like expression, a mustache folded over his mouth like an antiphrasis, which tinged whatever he said with maliciousness, no matter how solemn it was."" - Edoardo Albinati & John Satriano; Story Written on a Motorcycle; Antioch Review (Yellow Springs, Ohio); Summer 1992. ""Perhaps Charles McGrath, in The New Yorker, sums up the ambivalence most eloquently. 'How good are these books really?' he asks, and answers: not so good--although he does so in the more flattering antiphrasis of 'good enough that you wish they were even better.'"" - Neil Gordon; The Admiral; Village Voice (New York); Jun 6, 1995."
antanaclasis \ant-an-uh-KLAS-is\	noun A play on words in which a key word is repeated in a different, often contrary, sense. [From Greek antanaklasis (echo or reflection), from anti- (against) + ana- + klasis (breaking or bending).] Some examples of antanaclasis: * Your argument is sound, nothing but sound. -Benjamin Franklin * If you aren't fired with enthusiasm, you will be fired with enthusiasm. -Vince Lombardi * Learn some craft when young, that when old you may live without craft. -Anonymous
pavonine \PAV-uh-nyn\	"adjective 1. Of or resembling a peacock. 2. Vain; showy. [Latin pavoninus, from pavo, peacock.] ""The artists were attacked for being a narcissistic, pavonine, and self-regarding group."""
viperine \VY-puhr-in, -puh-ryn\	"adjective Of or relating to a viper; venomous; malicious. [From Latin vipera (snake), which arose from a mispronunciation/contraction of vivipera, from vivus (alive) + parere (to give birth). Vipers are named so because most vipers give birth to live young (instead of eggs). The eggs stay within the mother's body till they are ready to hatch. Earliest documented use: around 1540.] ""The musical taught a generation of viperine office politicians how to stick a shiv into their bosses without leaving any fingerprints on the handle."" - Terry Teachout; Lovable, Huggable, and Unscrupulous Too; The Wall Street Journal (New York); Mar 29, 2011."
anserine \AN-suh-ryn, -rin\ also anserous	"adjective 1. A goose or gooselike. 2. Stupid; foolish; silly. [Latin anserinus, pertaining to geese, from anser, goose.] ""Then, with growing horror, I realised I was not a qualified anserine counsellor."""
collyrium (kuh-LIR-ee-ehm) plural collyria or collyriums	"noun An eye-salve or eyewash. [From Latin, from Greek kollurion (eye-salve), diminutive of kollura (roll of bread).] ""Kabir, in my eyes reddened by love How can collyrium be applied?"""
cataract \KAT-uh-rakt\	"noun 1. A clouding of the naturally occurring crystalline lens. 2. A waterfall. [From Latin cataracta (waterfall, portcullis), from Greek katarahaktes (downpour), from Greek katarassein (down rush), from Greek kata (down) + arassein (to strike). The medical term cataract stems from the sense of portcullis which is a falling gate or covering. The whitish appearance of onrushing water, cascading down a waterfall, is exactly what a dense cataract looks like through the pupil -- it can be a whitish, sometimes vertically streaked density. The cataract itself, in medical terms, is a clouding of the normally clear crystalline lens. In the 1500s, the term cataract began to be applied to the whitish clouding of dense clouding of the crystalline lens. The lens, along with the cornea, focuses light rays onto the retina, which is how we see. As a cataract develops, our vision progressively blurs and objects become duskier and browner (brunescent) because blue and violet rays are preferentially absorbed by the cataractous lens, leaving largely the murkier reds and browns to pass through. The last works of the French impressionist painter Claude Monet (1840-1926), especially his Japanese footbridge paintings and the ""House from the Rose Garden"" series painted at his home at Giverny, show this brunescent change over time. Monet's right cataract was removed in January, 1923, and works painted after this time show a return of the blues and violets to his artistic palette. In fact, his magisterial ""Waterlilies"" series of 22 murals (Les Nympheas), finally completed right before his death in 1926 and now spectacularly viewable in the refurbished Orangerie in Paris, show the subtle blues and greens of the lily pads on the ponds. The other definition of cataract is waterfall. The six large waterfalls of the Nile river are usually called the cataracts of the Nile, near one of which was built the Aswan Dam.] ""The cataracts blow their trumpets from the steep No more shall grief of mine the season wrong; I hear the Echoes through the mountains throng, The Winds come to me from the fields of sleep."" William Wordsworth; Ode: Intimations of Immortality From Recollections of Early Childhood; 1802."
Griselda \gri-ZEL-duh\	"noun 1. A woman of exemplary meekness and patience. 2. A female given name: from a Germanic word meaning `gray battle.' [Def. 1 after a character in a tale of the same name in Giovanni Boccaccio's Decameron.] ""Whereas Rosina in `Barber' is a spitfire, all flame and sass, Cenerentola is a more demanding and less appealing role. She must bide her time but persuade her audience and her Prince that she's more than a patient Griselda who deserves happiness and redemption."" - Willard Spiegelman, Opera: Cinderella is a ball, The Wall Street Journal, Nov 2, 1995."
Dr. Strangelove \DOK-tuhr STRAYNJ-luv\	"noun A person, especially a military or government official, who advocates initiating nuclear warfare. Also called Strangelove. [After a character in a movie of the same name (1963) by U.S. director Stanley Kubrick.] ""The US tests are part of a 13-year, $60 billion `stockpile stewardship' program which will enable our Dr. Strangeloves to design new nuclear bombs in computer-simulated virtual reality."""
bovarism \BO-vuh-riz-em\	"noun An exaggerated, especially glamorized, estimate of oneself; conceit. [From French bovaryisme, after Emma Bovary, a character in Flaubert's novel Madame Bovary.] ""The public property is not so much her as Bovarism. She is part of the collective unconscious. She is, and can be, everyone."" - Alan Franks, France's best-kept secret, The Times of London, Aug 12, 1995."
gnathonic \na-THON-ik\	"adjective Sycophantic; fawning. [From Latin gnathonicus, derivative of Gnathon- (stem of Gnatho) name of a sycophantic character in the Roman comedy Eunuchus by Terence.] ""And that's why today any myrmidon, any gnathonic sycophant, any obsequious assistant or menial hanger-on is called a toadeater or, more often, a toady."""
redivivus \red-uh-VY-vuhs\	"adjective Revived or reborn. [From Latin re- (again) + vivus (living).] ""[C.S. Lewis] thought 'Lady Chatterley's Lover' paganism redivivus, which perhaps it was."" - Roger Lewis Burgess; Yes, I Admit, God is God; The New York Times; Nov 2, 1986."
diglot \DY-glot\	"adjective Bilingual. noun A bilingual book, person, etc. [From Greek diglottos, from di- (two) + -glottos, from glossa (tongue, language).] ""The oldest inscriptions in a Berber language - two diglot inscriptions found at Dugga in Tunisia - are written in Tifinag."""
sforzando \sfort-SAHN-do\	"adjective, adverb With sudden force or strong accent (used as a musical direction). noun A note or group of notes with strong emphasis. [From Italian sforzare (to force), from Latin fortis (strong). Ultimately from the Indo-European root bhergh- (high), which is also the source of iceberg, belfry, borough, burg, burglar, bourgeois, fortify, and force. First recorded use: 1801.] ""Establishing a driving rhythm with the barking of sforzando strings, the piece remained complex, teetering between moments of brooding and violent bursts."" - Penderecki Thrills Beijing; Global Times (Beijing, China); Oct 17, 2010."
cwm \koom\	"noun A steep bowl-shaped mountain basin, carved by glaciers. Also known as cirque. [From Welsh cwm (valley). The letter w works as a vowel in the Welsh language and it has given another such word (without a standard vowel aeiou, or y) to English: crwth (krooth) meaning crowd (an ancient Celtic stringed instrument).] ""By a process of elimination, which is a ticklish phrase to use about Soviet selection methods, the hordes of trainees will be reduced to about 150 fit to carry Stalin's name over countless crevasses, through the cwms, and along the cols -- to the very ultimate peak of the ultimate mountain."""
canary \kuh-NAR-ee\	"noun 1. A canary bird. 2. A woman singer. An informer; a stool pigeon. 3. A sweet white wine from the Canary Islands, similar to Madeira. 4. A lively 16th-century court dance. 5. A light to moderate or vivid yellow color. [French canari, from Spanish canario, of the Canary Islands, from (Islas) Canarias, Canary (Islands), from Late Latin Canariae (Insulae), (islands) of dogs, from Latin canarius, pertaining to dogs, canine, from canis, dog.] ""Other Hollywood illuminati have denounced Mr. Kazan for his supposed treachery; a newspaper columnist describes him as `the most famous canary of the Cold War'."" - Geoffrey Wheatcroft, The Waterfront All Over Again, The Wall Street Journal, Mar 19, 1999."
buffalo \BUF-uh-lo\ [verb sense]	"verb tr. 1. To intimidate, as by a display of confidence or authority. 2. To deceive; hoodwink. 3. To confuse; bewilder. [Italian bufalo, or Portuguese, or Spanish bufalo, from Late Latin bufalus, from Latin bubalus, from Greek boubalos.] ""Moe Howard (Paul Ben-Victor), the supposed brains of the act, is easily buffaloed by studio bosses."""
hysteron proteron \HIS-tuh-ron PROT-uh-ron\	"noun 1. A figure of speech in which the natural or rational order of its terms is reversed, as in bred and born instead of born and bred. 2. The logical fallacy of assuming as true and using as a premise a proposition that is yet to be proved. [Late Latin, from Greek husteron proteron, latter first : husteron, neuter sing. of husteros, latter, later + proteron, neuter sing. of proteros, former.] ""Intriguingly linked with this imprecision is the hysteron proteron of line 6, whose uncertain sequence of bearing arms, and then learning their use opens more space between the two acts than it closes."""
tractate \TRAK-tayt\	"noun A treatise; an essay. [Latin tractatus.] ""Oh, I spoke my speech out -- cribbed from Plato's tractate..."" - Robert Browning, Pietro of Abano, 19th C."
prosopopeia also prosopopoeia \pruh-so-puh-PEE-uh\	"noun 1. A figure of speech in which an absent or imaginary person is represented as speaking. 2. A figure of speech in which inanimate objects or abstractions are endowed with human qualities or are represented as possessing human form. Personification. [Latin prosopopoeia, from Greek prosopopoiia : prosopon, face, mask, dramatic character : pros-, pros- + opon, face (from ops, eye) + poiein, to make.] ""This is not theft, but kidnapping, summoning, prosopopoeia. In Eliot's earlier poem we still have one foot in another poet's hell. Here, Dante is summoned to the City of London, his lines marauded, his inferno woven within another of Eliot's own making."""
raisonneur \rez-uh-NUR\	"noun A character in a play, novel, or the like who voices the central theme, philosophy, or point of view of the work. [From French: literally, one who reasons or argues, equivalent to raisonn(er) to reason, argue + -eur.] ""The Fool in King Lear is the apotheosis of the ironic commentator, the raisonneur who sees through the world's follies and the blunders of its leaders."" - A Clown is not a Fool, The New Straits Times, Jul 8, 1998."
deus ex machina \DAY-uhs eks ma-kuh-nuh, -nah, MAK-uh-nuh\	"noun 1. In Greek and Roman drama, a god lowered by stage machinery to resolve a plot or extricate the protagonist from a difficult situation. 2. An unexpected, artificial, or improbable character, device, or event introduced suddenly in a work of fiction or drama to resolve a situation or untangle a plot. 3. A person or event that provides a sudden and unexpected solution to a difficulty. [New Latin deus ex machina : deus, god + ex, from + machina, machine (translation of Greek theos apo mekhanes).] ""In fact the duke acts as the deus ex machina of the piece, working in the background to ensure that everything turns out right and manipulating the characters' actions along the way."""
gemutlichkeit \guh-myoo-likh-KYT, -MOOT-\	"noun Warm friendliness; amicability. [German, from gemutlich, congenial.] ""The establishment's gemutlichkeit is fueled by a low-key, funky decor and the friendliness of the staff."" - Christopher Brooks; Cozy With Comfort Food; The New York Times; Jan 4, 2009."
kitsch \kich\	"noun 1. Art or artwork characterized by sentimental, often pretentious bad taste. The mentality in which such art is conceived or appreciated. 2. Culture or civilization in a degraded state of sentimentality and vulgarity. adjective Relating to or characterized by kitsch. [German, probably of dialectal origin.] ""Survivors were naturally eager to forget the grimness, and she suggests that they were helped in this by kitsch war poetry and by heroic military films."" - Hearing silence; The Economist (London, UK); Oct 28, 2000."
Anschluss \AN-shloos\	"noun A political union, especially the one unifying Nazi Germany and Austria in 1938. [German, annexation, from anschliessen, to enclose, annex : an, on (from Middle High German ane, from Old High German ana.) + schliessen, to close, from Middle High German sliezen, from Old High German sliozan.] ""I am hopeful that we can get beyond the divisiveness of the last year without a return to the factionalism that made Reform such an easy target for Buchanan's Anschluss."""
leitmotif \LIGHT-mo-teef\ also leitmotiv	"noun A recurrent theme in a piece of music or literature, situation, etc. [From German Leitmotiv (lead motif), from leit- (leading) + Motiv (motive). Ultimately from the Indo-European root leit- (to go forth, to die), which also gave us lead, load, lode, and livelihood. Earliest documented use: 1937.] ""Smart women speaking makes many men angry. Looking back, I see that this has been a leitmotif of my life. This may not surprise you, but it surprises me, every time."" - Elizabeth Farrelly; If Only the World Boasted More Uppity Women; The Sydney Morning Herald (Australia); Feb 13, 2014."
aufklarung \OUF-klay-roong\	"noun 1. Enlightenment. 2. European History. The Enlightenment. [German : auf, up (from Middle High German uf, from Old High German.) + Klarung, a making clear, from klaren, to make clear, from Middle High German klaeren, from klar, clear, from Latin clarus.] ""The idea that a profanity, especially one that was used as more than a casual expletive, could be used as a - pardon - legitimate verb was to me something of an Aufklarung, an enlightenment."" - Jon Hahn, A Deposit From Mr. Ed Pays Garden Dividends, Seattle Post - Intelligencer, Oct 26, 1999."
Miltonic \mil-TON-ik\ also Miltonian	"adjective 1. Of or pertaining to the poet Milton or his writings. 2. Resembling Milton's majestic style. [After John Milton (1608-1674).] ""Siphoning off the grandeur of his Miltonic inspiration and transfusing it with foggily redundant obscenities, Lord-Wolff denatures evil into sniggering adolescent angst."" - Sybil Steinberg, Forecasts: Fiction, Publishers Weekly, Dec 20, 1999."
dauphin \DOW-fin\	"noun 1. The eldest son of the king of France from 1349 to 1830. 2. An heir apparent in business, politics, etc. [From the title of the eldest son of a king of France and the direct heir to the throne, from 1350 to 1830. The title came from the dolphins that adorned the coat of arms, from Old French daulphin (dolphin), from Latin delphinus, from Greek delphin, from delphus (womb), from the shape of the organ. Earliest documented use: 1485.] ""But the dauphin should not forget that a successful reign requires a strong successor--and not a mere imitator."""
ocker \OK-uhr\	"noun 1. An uncultured Australian male. 2. An uncouth, offensive male chauvinist. adjective 1. Of or pertaining to such a person. 2. Typically Australian. [After Ocker, a character in an Australian television series.] ""While Australian sports teams and individuals continue to soak up success everywhere you look, the average ocker is getting lazier and putting on the beef."""
solander \suh-LAN-duhr\	"noun A case for maps, plates, etc., made to resemble a book and having the front cover and fore edge hinged. [Named after Daniel Charles Solander (1736-1782), Swedish naturalist who invented it.] ""Going through solander boxes in the British Museum and consulting catalogues ...."""
Faustian \FOU-stee-uhn\	"adjective 1. Of, pertaining to, or characteristic of Faust. 2. Sacrificing spiritual values for power, knowledge, or material gain. 3. Characterized by spiritual dissatisfaction or torment. 4. Possessed with a hunger for knowledge or mastery. [After Faust also Faustus, a magician and alchemist in German legend who sells his soul to the devil in exchange for power and knowledge.] ""Young artists, new galleries and old museums all seem eager to play their part in this Faustian bargain: loads of publicity, rising prices for contemporary art and good crowds for exhibitions in exchange for what a British art critic, William Feaver, calls 'headline art'."""
jugal \JOO-guhl\	adjective 1. Of or pertaining to the cheek or the cheekbone. 2. Entomology. Pertaining to, involving, or situated near the jugum.
furfuraceous \fur-fyuh-REY-shuhs, -fuh-\	"adjective 1. Covered with dandruff. 2. Flaky. [From Latin furfur (bran, flake). Earliest documented use: 1650.] ""When she looked at the photographs of raging urticaria and furfuraceous rashes, she teetered between repulsion and captivation."" Dashka Slater; The Wishing Box; Chronicle Books; 2010. ""I met quite a number of composers who were frankly flaky, or furfuraceous, to use a more elegant term."" - Nicolas Slonimsky; Musings of a Musical Mind; Los Angeles Times; Mar 27, 1988."
apophasis \uh-POF-uh-sis\	"noun Allusion to something by denying it will be said. [Via Latin from Greek apophanai (to say no), from apo- (away from) + phanai (to say). Ultimately from the Indo-European root bha- (to speak) that is also the source of fable, phone, fame, boon, and infant. First recorded use: 1657.] ""It's an Afghan apophasis. By claiming he does not want to participate in a political process that is hopelessly overrun with corruption, Abdullah is acknowledging just the opposite -- that he very much wants power and influence in the Afghan political realm."""
llano \LAH-noh, YAH-no\	"noun An open grassy, almost treeless plain. [From Spanish llano (plain), from Latin planus (plain), from planus (level). First recorded use: 1613.] ""I decided to prepare this year by reading some Westerns to get in the mood. Generally, that is a type of literature I have avoided, but once you get to where you recognize the names of places and know a llano from a plateau, they are kind of fun."""
tmesis \tuh-MEE-sis, TMEE-sis\	"noun Stuffing a word into the middle of another word. [From Greek tmesis (a cutting), from temnein (to cut). Ultimately from the Indo-European root tem- (to cut), which is also the source of tonsure, temple, contemplate, epitome, tome, anatomy, and atomy. First recorded use: 1586.] ""I don't like tmesis; it's abso-bloody-lutely ri-flipping-diculous."""
rectrix \REK-triks\	"noun Any of the quill feathers of a bird's tail that are important in controlling flight direction. [Although ""rectrix"" (from the Latin word ""rectrix,"" the feminine of ""rector,"" meaning ""one that directs"") has been an English word since the late 18th century, it has clung to its Latin plural ""rectrices."" This is not terribly unusual for a technical term like ""rectrix."" (Note also ""cilium,"" whose more common plural ""cilia"" refers especially to the hairlike extensions on the exterior of some cells.) ""Rectrix"" has another meaning wholly unrelated to birds. It's also used (albeit rarely) to refer to a woman who rules or governs.] ""In general, your only chance to see most or all of a bird's rectrices is when the bird is in flight."""
lagniappe \lan-YAP, LAN-yap\	"noun An unexpected benefit, especially a small gift a customer receives with a purchase. [From Louisiana French, from American Spanish la ñapa (the gift), from Quechua yapa (something added).] ""Of little consequence, a tiny lagniappe and a green salad came compliments of the house."" - M.H. Reed; In Ossining, a Restaurant With a Past; The New York Times; Sep 23, 2001."
risible \RIZ-uh-buhl\	"adjective 1. Laughable; ludicrous. 2. Disposed to laugh. 3. Relating to laughter. [From Latin risus, past participle of ridere (to laugh). Other words that share the same root are ridiculous, deride, rident, and riant.] ""The judge said that John Harrison's statement in which he said he found it hard to get up in the morning was risible."""
hyssop \HIS-uhp\	Bible. A plant, perhaps the origan, whose twigs were used in ceremonial sprinkling.
shilly-shally \SHIL-ee-SHAL-ee\	"verb 1. To waffle. 2. Dawdle. [Shall I? Shall I? When you just don't know what to do, it may feel as if asking that question twice will somehow help you decide. The early 1600s saw the use of the phrase ""stand shall I, shall I"" to describe vacillation or indecision. By 1700, the phrase had been altered to ""shill I, shall I,"" most likely because people just liked the vowel alteration (that's the same process that gave us ""dillydally"" and ""wishy-washy""). Soon after, the adverbial ""shilly-shally"" made the jump from slang to literature, and by the late 1700s it was being used not only as an adverb, but also as an adjective, a noun, and a verb. From reduplication of the question, ""Shall I?""] ""We go after bigger things, and don't stand shilly-shally on the brink as you do."" - Anthony Trollope; The Way We Live Now; 1875."
periphrasis \puh-RIF-ruh-sis\	"noun A roundabout way of saying something, using more words than necessary. [Via Latin, from Greek periphrasis, from periphrazein (to explain around), from peri- (around) + phrazein (to speak, say). First recorded use: 1533.] ""Why the lawsuit? Pfizer said it had 'sought the assistance of the Philippine legal system' (an elegant periphrasis, that)."" - High Blood; Philippine Daily Inquirer (Manila, Philippines); Nov 19, 2006."
quango \KWANG-goh\	noun Great Britain. A semi-public advisory and administrative body supported by the government and having most of its members appointed by the government. [1975–80; qu(asi)-a(utonomous) n(on-)g(overnmental) o(rganization) or qu(asi)-a(utonomous) n(ational) g(overnmental) o(rganization)]
nisi \NY-sy, NEE-see\	"adjective Not yet final, taking effect at a later date unless invalidated by a certain cause. The word usually appears in forms such as ""decree nisi"", ""order nisi"". [From Latin nisi (unless, if not), from ne- (not) + si (if). A Latin injunction that uses this term is: De mortuis nil nisi bonum (Say nothing but good of the dead).] ""The following divorces were granted decree nisi on December 19, 2003."" - Divorces Granted; The Royal Gazette (Bermuda); Jan 25, 2004."
amicus curiae (uh-MY-kuhs KYOOR-ee-ee, uh-MI-kuhs KYOOR-ee-i) plural amici curiae	"noun A person or group, not party to a particular litigation, but permitted by the court to advise it on the matter related to the case. [From Latin, literally friend of the court, from amicus (friend) + curiae, from curia (court).] ""FairTest and other groups argued in amicus curiae briefs that any decision relying heavily on the ACT or the SAT as a valid admissions factor would be wrong."" - Jay Mathews; The Bias Question; The Atlantic Monthly (Boston, Massachusetts); Nov 2003."
embracery \em-BRAY-suh-ree\ also imbracery	"noun An attempt to influence a jury illegally as by bribery, threats, or promises. One guilty of embracery is known as an embraceor. [From Middle English embracerie, ultimately from em- + brace (the two arms).] ""A Columbia County man pleaded guilty Thursday to a charge of embracery, an illegal attempt to influence a juror, in his drunken-driving trial."" - Mayor's Bucks Back Skyfest; Augusta Chronicle (Georgia); Sep 27, 2002. ""Further, every night the non-sequestered civil jury went home where they were exposed to the local and nationally syndicated radio and television talk shows and also the Los Angeles Times... is a form of embracery, the act of attempting to influence a juror or jury in its most high-tech form."" - Dennis Schatzman; Race, Media, American Law and O.J. Simpson; Sentinel (Los Angeles, California); Apr 30, 1997."
champerty \CHAM-puhr-tee\	"noun Aiding in a lawsuit in return for a share in the proceeds. [From Middle English champartie, from Middle French champart (part of the field: a feudal lord's share of his tenant's crop), from champ (field), from Latin campus (field) + part. A related term is barratry, the stirring up of baseless lawsuits.] A related term is barratry, the stirring up of baseless lawsuits. ""Champerty, which is illegal in many, but not all, states, occurs when someone helps pay the costs of someone else's lawsuit in exchange for a share of any proceeds."" - Wade Lambert and Arthur S Hayes; Investing in Patents to File Suits is Curbed; The Wall Street Journal (New York); May 30, 1990. ""Maconochie had been using a British Virgin Islands company called North-South to raise money to take on the bank without breaching the rule of champerty and maintenance. This bans individuals from seeking outside financial help to finance their cases."" - Mark Westfield; Mac Attack to Tap Backers; The Australian (Sydney); Sep 22, 2000."
gulosity \goo-LAH-suh-tee\	"noun Gluttony; greediness. [""Gulosity"" is a rare word for gluttony that sees only occasional use in English these days. It derives via Middle English and Anglo-French from the Latin adjective ""gulosus"" (""gluttonous"") and ultimately from the noun ""gula"" (""gullet""). It was apparently a favorite word of famed 18th-century author and lexicographer Samuel Johnson, who has been falsely credited with coining ""gulosity,"" even though evidence for the word's use dates back to the 15th century. According to his biographer, James Boswell, Johnson was no light eater himself: he ""indulged with such intenseness, that while in the act of eating, the veins of his forehead swelled, and generally a strong perspiration was visible.""] ""He (Shakespeare) did not drink much ... it is doubtful whether he ate much either. There is gulosity in Ben Jonson's plays, but no slavering in Will's."" - Anthony Burgess; Shakespeare; Carroll & Graf Publishers; 2002. ""The result of my holiday gulosity impacted upon me one night at a Santa Monica restaurant called Rix. The owner had stopped by to chat and was discussing a live jellyfish he planned on placing in a tank as part of the restaurant's decor. I was in a comatose state and when I heard jellyfish I said, 'Sure, I'll try it, just a small bite.'"" - Al Martinez; Eat, Eat, Eat, Drink, Eat, Chat, Drink, Eat, Eat; The Los Angeles Times; Dec 22, 1999."
woolgathering \WOOL-gath-uh-ring\	"noun Indulgence in idle daydreaming. [""Woolgathering"" once literally referred to the act of gathering loose tufts of wool that had gotten caught on bushes and fences as sheep passed by. Woolgatherers must have seemed to wander aimlessly, gaining little for their efforts, for in the mid-16th century ""woolgathering"" began to appear in figurative phrases such as ""my wits (or my mind) went a-woolgathering"" -- in other words, ""my mind went wandering aimlessly."" From there, it wasn't long before the word ""woolgathering"" came to suggest the act of indulging in purposeless mind-wandering.] ""My woolgathering was abruptly interrupted by a question from the flight attendant."""
ventifact \VEN-tuh-fact\	"noun A stone shaped, polished, or faceted by windblown sand. [From Latin venti- (wind), from ventus (wind) + factum (something made), from facere (to make or do). First recorded use: 1911. Also see yardang.] ""On that last trip, I knelt by the river and took a stone from the deep pockets of my wind pants. It was a black ventifact, an igneous rock. During eons of exposure to the wind, its surface had become smooth and polished."""
quincunx \KWIN-kunks\	"noun An arrangement of five things in a square or rectangle with one at each corner and one in the middle. [As our second example sentence suggests, today's word has its origins in ancient Rome. To the Romans, a ""quincunx"" was a coin whose name comes from the Latin roots ""quinque,"" meaning ""five,"" and ""uncia,"" meaning ""one twelfth."" The weight of the coin equaled five twelfths of a libra, a unit of weight similar to our pound. The ancients used a pattern of five dots arranged like the spots on a die as a symbol for the coin, and English speakers applied the word to arrangements similar to that distinctive five-dot mark.] ""As we walked along the geometric beds -- many of them planted in an ancient Roman quincunx pattern -- I made notes on the beautiful crops I had never grown."""
peckish \PEK-ish\	adjective Chiefly British Informal. 1. Somewhat hungry: By noon we were feeling a bit peckish. 2. Rather irritable: He's always a bit peckish after his nap.
leptorrhine \LEP-tuh-ryn\	"adjective Having a long narrow nose. [From Greek lepto- (thin) + rhin (nose). Also see rhinorrhea (a runny nose). First recorded use: 1880.] ""Like a horny sightless woman on a blind date, she begins to knead her heavy friendship-ring-laden fingers into my face. 'Leptorrhine nose ... kumquat-headed ...'"""
kumquat \KUHM-kwot\	"noun 1. A small, round or oblong citrus fruit having a sweet rind and acid pulp, used chiefly for preserves. [1699, from Chinese (Cantonese) kamkwat, from kam ""golden"" + kwat ""orange."" Cantonese pronunciation of Chinese kin-ku.]"
hallux \HAL-uhks\ plural halluces \HAL-yuh-seez\	"noun Big toe. More generally, the innermost digit on the hind foot of animals. It is usually backward-directed in birds. [From Late Latin hallux, from Latin hallus, similar to pollex, thumb.] ""Where in the human body would you find the hallux?"" - Roger Perkins, The Quiz, The Daily Telegraph (UK), Dec 27, 1997."
crossbuck \KROS-buk\	"noun An X-shaped warning sign at a highway-railroad crossing. [From cross- + buck, from sawbuck.] ""The federal investigation could result in an upgrade of warning equipment at the crossing, which is marked only by stop signs and X-shaped railroad crossbuck signs."""
ocellus \o-SEL-uhs\ plural ocelli	"noun 1. A small simple eye common to invertebrates. 2. An eyelike colored spot on an animal (as on peacock feathers, butterfly wings, fish, etc.) or on a leaf of a plant. [Latin ocellus, little eye, diminutive of oculus, eye.] ""The sarcastic fringehead is an extremely territorial fish found along the Pacific Coast from San Francisco Bay to Baja California ... The ocelli on their dorsal fins are metallic blue, surrounded by a golden ring."" - The Kids' Reading Room, The Los Angeles Times, Jul 18, 2000."
newel \NOO-uhl, NYOO-\	"noun 1. A center column that supports the steps of a spiral staircase. 2. A post supporting the handrail of a staircase. [From Middle English nowel, from Middle French nouel (kernel), from Late Latin nucalis (nutlike), from Latin nuc-, nux (nut).] ""Midway through the stair project he appeared with a solid pine stair newel, stripped and sanded."""
septum \SEP-tuhm\ plural septa \SEP-tuh\	"noun A dividing wall, in an animal or a plant. For example, the partition between the nostrils. [Latin saeptum, partition, from neuter of saeptus, past participle of saepire, to enclose, from saepes, fence.] ""A 10-year-old Massachusetts girl wound up in hospital after trying to achieve the pierced nose look with a magnetic earring on her nostril... The magnets were so powerful that they had broken from the rings and become embedded on either side of the nasal septum, out of reach of available medical instruments."""
vermicular \ver-MIK-yuh-ler\	"adjective 1. Resembling a worm in form or motion. 2. Of, relating to, or caused by worms. [What does the word ""vermicular"" have in common with the pasta on your plate? If you're eating vermicelli (a spaghetti-like pasta made in long thin strings) the answer is ""vermis,"" a Latin noun meaning ""worm."" If you dig deep enough, you'll find that ""vermis"" is the root underlying not only ""vermicular"" and ""vermicelli,"" but also ""vermiculate"" (which can mean either ""full of worms"" or ""tortuous"") and even ""worm"" itself.] ""Students will observe and document the vermicular decomposition of vegetative waste."""
philately \fuh-LAT-uh-lee\	"noun Stamp collecting. [Who wouldn't love something tax free? George Herpin did. He was a French stamp fancier back in the 1860s, when stamps were a fairly new invention. Before stamps, the recipient of a letter -- not the sender -- had to pay the postage. Stamps forced the sender to foot the bill, and created a lot of stamp lovers among folks on the receiving end of the mail -- and a mania for stamp collecting. ""Timbromania"" was toyed with as a term to affix to this new hobby -- from the French word for stamp, ""timbre."" But when Herpin suggested ""philatelie"" (anglicized to ""philately""), combining the Greek root ""phil-,"" meaning ""loving,"" with Greek ""ateleia,"" meaning ""tax-exemption,"" stamp lovers everywhere took a fancy to it and the name stuck.] ""Those who imagine philately as boring probably have never examined a stamp, seen the intricacy of the design or researched the story behind the postal issue."""
purlicue \PUHR-li-kyu\	"noun 1. The space between the extended forefinger and thumb. 2. A flourish or curl at the end of a handwritten word. Also known as curlicue. 3. A discourse, especially its summarizing part. [Of uncertain origin, probably from Scots pirlie (curly).] ""Won Li's attentions moved to the weblike purlicue between my thumb and forefinger."" - Suzann Ledbetter; A Lady Never Trifles with Thieves; Pocket; 2003."
grig \grig\	"noun 1. A cricket or grasshopper. 2. A small or young eel. 3. A lively or lighthearted person. [The word is often used in the phrase ""merry as a grig"". The word is of uncertain origin, though various theories have been suggested, such as a corruption of ""merry as a cricket"" or ""merry as a Greek"", as in Shakespeare's Troilus and Cressida: ""Then she's a merry Greek indeed.""] ""When all is reversed and we shall be like the insane, to whom the antics of the sane seem the crazy twistings of a grig."""
growler \GROU-luhr\	"noun 1. One that growls. 2. A container (as a pail or pitcher) brought by a customer to fetch beer. 3. A small iceberg. 4. A four-wheeled cab. 5. An electromagnetic device for testing short-circuited coils. [From growl, from Middle English groule, grollen (to rumble), probably of imitative origin. ""When Euro-metal comes to mind it can often rouse visions of hairy, horn-helmeted growlers howling about faraway lands and legendary times."" Fawnda Mithrush; Primordial: Thoroughly Modern Metal; Vue Weekly (Edmonton, Canada); May 7, 2009.] ""When Euro-metal comes to mind it can often rouse visions of hairy, horn-helmeted growlers howling about faraway lands and legendary times."" - Fawnda Mithrush; Primordial: Thoroughly Modern Metal; Vue Weekly (Edmonton, Canada); May 7, 2009. ""The two-story building will feature a to-go bar on the first floor for beer aficionados to buy and fill growlers."" - Rachael Fisher; Brewing Company on the Move; The Anchorage Daily News (Alaska); May 1, 2009. ""We sailed the 30-mile stretch of the Atlantic Sound, otherwise known as Iceberg Alley. The smaller, granite-hard growlers are to be avoided just as deftly as the enormous floating glacial islands."" - Neill Johnston; Cool Cruise Among Ice and Penguins; Birmingham Post (UK); May 15, 2009. ""So this growler will get into Audi R8 territory for about a third of the Audi's $130,000 starting price tag."" - Jeremy Cato; New Challenger Even Better; The Globe and Mail (Toronto, Canada); Feb 19, 2008."
recapitulate \ree-kuh-PICH-uh-leyt\	"verb tr. To summarize or to repeat. [From Latin recapitulare (to sum up), re- (again) + capitulare (to draw up under headings), from capitulum (little head, chapter), from caput (head). Ultimately from the Indo-European root kaput- (head), also the origin of head, captain, chef, chapter, cadet, cattle, chattel, achieve, biceps, mischief, and occiput. Earliest documented use: 1551.] ""The discovery of the Higgs particle is an astonishing triumph of mathematics' power to reveal the workings of the universe. It's a story that's been recapitulated in physics numerous times, but each new example thrills just the same."" - Brian Greene; Mind Over Matter; Smithsonian (Washington, DC); Jul/Aug 2013."
ekphrasis \EK-fruh-sis\	"noun A literary description of or commentary on a visual work of art. [Although ""ekphrasis"" (also spelled ""ecphrasis"") is a relatively new entry in our dictionary, the practice of using words to comment on a piece of visual art is an ancient one. One of the earliest and most commonly cited forms of ekphrasis occurs in The Iliad, when Homer provides a long and discursive account of the elaborate scenes embossed on the shield of Achilles. It should be no surprise, then, that the term ""ekphrasis"" derives from Greek, where it literally means ""description"" and was formed by combining the prefix ""ex-"" (""out"") with the verb ""phrazein"" (""to point out or explain""). ""Ekphrasis"" first appeared in English in the early 18th century.] ""As an assignment for her Rhetoric & Composition class, Samantha wrote an ekphrasis on the theme of emotional isolation in the paintings of Edward Hopper."""
xyster \ZIS-ter\	noun A surgical instrument for scraping bones.
gonfalon \GON-fuh-luhn\	noun 1. A banner suspended from a crossbar, often with several streamers or tails. 2. A standard, esp. one used by the medieval Italian republics. [1585–95; < It gonfalone < MF gonfalon, gonfanon < Gmc; see gonfanon]
hebdomad \HEB-duh-mad\	noun 1. The number seven. 2. A period of seven successive days; week. [1535–45; < L hebdomad- < Gk (s. of hebdomás week), equiv. to hébdom(os) seventh (see hepta-) + -ad- -ad1]
Calumet \KAL-yuh-met\	"noun A highly ornamented ceremonial pipe of the American Indians. [The calumet has long been an important component of the ceremonies of Native American groups, but the first inhabitants of the Americas did not give the venerated pipe (also known as the ""peace pipe"") that name. English speakers borrowed ""calumet"" from American French, which had carried it from the dialects of France to North America. ""Chalumet,"" the French ancestor of ""calumet,"" traces to the Latin ""calamus"" and the Greek ""kalamos,"" both of which mean ""reed"" or ""pen."" French baron Louis-Armand de Lom d'Arce La Hontan, who explored North America in the 17th century, noted that French speakers had applied ""calumet"" to the highly ornamented clay pipes of Native Americans by the 1670s; English speakers followed suit before the turn of that century.] ""Trade encounters were marked by formal welcomes, oratory, gift exchange and feasting, ritually renewing the bonds between peoples. Participants sacralized relationships through smoking a calumet and thus invoking the Great Spirit to spiritually bind them together."""
burke \BERK\	"verb 1. To suppress quietly or indirectly. 2. Bypass, avoid. [When an elderly pensioner died at the Edinburgh boarding house of William Hare in 1827, the proprietor and his friend William Burke decided to sell the body to a local anatomy school. The sale was so lucrative that they decided to make sure they could repeat it. They began luring nameless wanderers (who were not likely to be missed) into the house, getting them drunk, then smothering or strangling them and selling the bodies. The two disposed of at least 15 victims before murdering a local woman whose disappearance led to their arrest. At Burke's execution (by hanging), irate crowds shouted ""Burke him!"" As a result of the case, the word ""burke"" became a byword first for death by suffocation or strangulation and eventually for any cover-up.] ""When Logeto came in, the killer burked him. Logeto never made a sound."" William Diehl; Hooligans; Villard Books; 1984. ""There is no point in burking the truth: Gandhi and India are fast going to be at odds with each other."" Does Mahatma Gandhi Matter?; Business Line (Chennai, India); Oct 1, 2007."
welter \WEL-ter\	"verb 1. Writhe, toss; also: wallow. 2. To become deeply sunk, soaked, or involved. 3. To be in turmoil. [""Welter"" can be used both as a noun (meaning ""turmoil"" or ""chaos"") and a verb. Which part of speech is older? The verb. It has been part of English since at least the 1300s, while the earliest uses of the noun date from the late 1590s. Both noun and verb have roots related to Dutch and Germanic terms meaning ""to roll,"" and both have found a place in English literature. The verb helps demonstrate extreme despair in the early Arthurian legend Morte Arthure (""He welterys, he wristeles, he wrynges hys handes!""), and in 1837 Thomas Carlyle used the noun in The French Revolution (""I leave the whole business in a frightful welter: ...not one of them understands anything of government"").] “For one reason or another I’ve found myself involved in several different operations lately in a positive welter of activity, disturbing me from my semi-retired torpor.” - Richard Vaughan-Davies; Tangle of Red Tape Strangling Enterprise; Daily Post (Liverpool, UK); May 9, 2007."
funambulism \fyoo-NAM-buh-liz-um\	"noun 1. Tightrope walking. 2. A show especially of mental agility. [Back in ancient Rome, tightrope walking was a popular spectacle at public gatherings. The Latin word for ""tightrope walker"" is ""funambulus,"" from the Latin ""funis,"" meaning ""rope,"" plus ""ambulare,"" meaning ""to walk."" It doesn't take any funambulism on our part to see how the word for an impressive act of physical skill and agility came to mean an impressive act of mental skill or agility. That extended sense of the word has been around since at least 1886, when British academic and writer Augustus Jessopp described the act of diagramming sentences as ""horrible lessons of ghastly grammar and dreary funambulism.""] ""As a game-show contestant Brenda amazed us all with her funambulism, answering every question correctly to win the $10,000 first prize."""
impugn \im-PYOON\	"verb tr. To call in question or cast doubt upon. [Via French from Latin impugnare (to attack), from im- (towards) + pugnare (to fight), from pugnus (fist). Ultimately from the Indo-European root peuk (to prick) which is also the source of point, puncture, pungent, punctual, poignant, pounce, and poniard. Earliest documented use: 1384.] ""'You can't impugn somebody's integrity without having proper evidence,' David Collier, chief executive of board, said earlier."""
supercilious \soo-puhr-SIL-i-uhs\	"adjective Showing haughty disdain. [The word alludes to someone being disdainful by raising an eyebrow. It's derived from Latin supercilium (eyebrow, pride), from super (above) + cilium (eyelid). Ultimately from the Indo-European root kel- (to cover, conceal, or save) that is also the source of hollow, hole, holster, hell, apocalypse, and eucalyptus. Earliest documented use: 1528.] ""I'm all for 'moving on' from the two world wars, obviously. But I'm not quite so keen to 'move on' from the cocky, supercilious, haughty, and dismissive view of our great nation."""
blithe \blahyth\	adjective 1. Glad; cheerful: Everyone loved her for her blithe spirit. 2. Without thought or regard; carefree: a blithe indifference to anyone's feelings.
charivari \shiv-uh-REE, SHIV-uh-ree, shuh-riv-uh-REE\	"noun 1. A noisy, mock serenade to a newly married couple, involving the banging of kettles, pots, and pans. 2. A confused, noisy spectacle. [From French charivari (hullabaloo), perhaps from Latin caribaria (headache), from Greek karebaria, from kare/kara (head) + barys (heavy). Earliest documented use: 1735. Also spelled as chivaree, chivari, and shivaree.] ""To the people, the charivari of Westminster politics didn't much matter."" - Polly Toynbee and David Walker; Dear New Leader; The Guardian (London, UK); Sep 27, 2010. ""Vivid performances abound in Bartholomew fair, making it essentially an extended charivari of colourful characters, with several thin threads of plot."" - Pat Donnelly; Fair is Anything But Pastoral; Montreal Gazette (Canada); Jul 4, 2009."
dendroid \DEN-droid\	"adjective Resembling, branching like, or shaped like a tree. [From Greek dendron (tree). Earliest documented use: 1846.] ""Above, branches spread a dendroid filigree across the sky."""
filigree \fil-i-gree\	noun Anything very delicate or fanciful: a filigree of frost. adjective Composed of or resembling filigree. verb tr. To adorn with or form into filigree.
aureate \OR-ee-ut\	"adjective 1. Of a golden color or brilliance. 2. Marked by grandiloquent and rhetorical style. [""Aureate"" is among several adjectives in English pertaining to gold that derive from the Latin name for the metal, ""aurum."" While its relatives ""auriferous"" and ""auric"" are more likely to appear in scientific contexts to describe substances containing or made from gold (or ""Au,"" to use its chemical symbol), ""aureate"" has tended to have a more literary allure since it was first used in English in the early 15th century. Over time, the word's use was extended from ""golden"" to ""resplendent,"" and it finally lost some of its luster as it came to mean ""grandiloquent.""] ""Matthew tried to get into the novel that Stephanie had recommended, but he found reading the author's aureate prose too much of a slog."""
dander \DAN-der\	"noun 1. Dandruff; specifically. minute scales from hair, feathers, or skin that may be allergenic. 2. Anger, temper [How did ""dander"" acquire its ""temper"" sense? Etymologists have come up with a few possibilities, but nothing is known for sure. Some experts have proposed, tongue-in-cheek, that the meaning stems from the image of an angry person tearing out his or her hair by the fistful, scattering dandruff in the process. Some think it may come from a West Indian word ""dander,"" which refers to a kind of ferment and suggests ""rising"" anger (in English, ""ferment"" can mean either ""an agent capable of causing fermentation"" or ""a state of unrest or excitement""). Yet another proposed possibility is that the anger sense was imported to America by early Dutch colonists and is from their phrase ""op donderen,"" meaning ""to burst into a sudden rage.""] ""That sort of arrogance really gets my dander up!"""
wormwood \WUHRM-wood\	"noun 1. A plant of the genus Artemisia, used in making absinthe and medicines. 2. Something that brings bitterness or grief. [From alteration of wermod, of obscure origin. Earliest documented use: 1400.] ""It is gall and wormwood for a leader already politically crippled by Britain's commitment in Iraq to find himself now also engaged in a confrontation with Iran."" - Max Hastings; Iran, the Vicious Victim; The New York Times; Mar 30, 2007."
primrose path \PRIM-rohz path\	"noun 1. An easy life, especially devoted to sensual pleasure. 2. A path of least resistance, especially one that ends in disaster. [From Latin prima rosa (first rose). Earliest documented use: 1604. It's not clear why ""primrose"" was picked for naming this metaphorical path. Perhaps Shakespeare chose the word for alliteration -- the word is first attested in his Hamlet] ""Meanwhile, Katich clung on; the primrose path is not for him. The road is strewn with rocks."""
ligneous \LIG-nee-uhs\	"adjective Having the texture or appearance of wood. [From Latin lignum (wood). Ultimately from the Indo-European root leg- (to collect), which is also the source of lexicon, legal, dialogue, lecture, logic, legend, logarithm, intelligent, diligent, sacrilege, elect, and loyal. Earliest documented use: 1626.] ""With Boris Johnson lumbering onto the Queen Vic set recently (and 'lumber' is the only appropriate word for his sturdily ligneous performance) ..."""
maw \maw\	"noun 1. The symbolic or theoretical center of a voracious hunger or appetite of any kind: the ravenous maw of Death. 2. The mouth, throat, or gullet of an animal, especially a carnivorous mammal. 3. A cavernous opening that resembles the open jaws of an animal: the gaping maw of hell. [From Old English maga. Earliest documented use: 1150.] ""Xiaobo Liu's wife said the toughest time for her was after he was arrested in 2008 but before he was indicted. He basically disappeared, she said, into the maw of China's security state."" - John Pomfret; China's Liu Xiaobo wins Nobel Peace Prize; The Washington Post; Oct 8, 2010."
glabrous \GLAY-brus\	"adjective Smooth; especially, having a surface without hairs or projections. [""Before them an old man, / wearing a fringe of long white hair, bareheaded, / his glabrous skull reflecting the sun's / light...."" No question about it -- the bald crown of an old man's head (as described here in William Carlos Williams's poem ""Sunday in the Park"") is ""a surface without hairs."" Williams's use isn't typical, though. More often ""glabrous"" appears in scientific contexts, such as the following description of wheat: ""The white glumes are glabrous, with narrow acuminate beaks."" And although Latin ""glaber,"" our word's source, can mean simply ""bald,"" when ""glabrous"" refers to skin with no hair in scientific English, it usually means skin that never had hair (such as the palms of the hands).] ""Wounds that involve the glabrous surface of the hand ideally are replaced with skin that possesses the same characteristics as the adjacent skin."""
gest or geste \jest\	"noun A tale, especially of someone's notable adventures or exploits. [From Old French geste (exploit), from Latin gesta (exploits), past participle of gerere (to carry on, perform). The word jest (joke) arose as a spelling variant of gest. Earliest documented use: Before 1300.] ""It is one of the highlights of the gest of the hero Ardasir."" - Kinga Ilona Markus-Takeshita; From Iranian Myth to Folk Narrative; Asian Folklore Studies; Jan 2001. ""We have beat him to his camp: run one before, And let the queen know of our gests."" - William Shakespeare; Antony and Cleopatra; Act IV, Scene VIII."
kip \kip\	"1. noun: Sleep; a place to sleep; a bed. 2. verb intr.: To sleep or nap. 3. noun: The hide of a young or small animal or a bundle of such hides. 4. noun: The basic unit of currency in Laos. 5. noun: A unit of weight equal to 1000 lb (453.6 kg). [1, 2: Perhaps from Danish kippe (cheap tavern). Earliest documented use: 1766. 3: Perhaps from Middle Dutch kip/kijp (a bundle, especially of hides). Earliest documented use: 1530. 4: From Thai. Earliest documented use: 1955. 5: An acronym formed from kilo- + pound. Earliest documented use: 1915.] ""When Charles and Diana married in 1981, PM David Cameron kipped on the pavement the night before to ensure he got a great view on the Mall. This time he'll have a ringside seat."" - Sarah Turner; Royal Wedding hotels; The Daily Mirror (London, UK); Dec 12, 2010. ""Indian Head, Anderson said, exerts 440 kips of pressure on the boulder."" - Robert Wilson; Indian Head Rock Getting a Face-lift; The Knoxville News Sentinel (Tennessee); May 8, 2008."
dun \duhn\	"I: verb tr. To make persistent demands for payment, especially for a debt. noun 1. Someone who duns. 2. A demand for payment. II: noun 1. A dull grayish brown color. 2. A horse in dun color. adjective Of dun color. [For I: Origin unknown. Earliest documented use: Early 17th century. For II: From Old English dun, perhaps from dusk. Earliest documented use: 953.] ""National artist and film director Carlo J. Caparas has been dunned for P540 million in income tax."" - Tax Evasion Charges Hound Caparas; Malaya (Manila, Philippines); Oct 22, 2010."
intromit \in-truh-MIT\	"verb tr. To enter, send, or admit. [From Latin intromittere, from intro- (inwardly) + mittere (to send). Earliest documented use: 1600.] ""I never tire of intromitting a hardboiled egg into a milk bottle, shell and all."" - Raymond Sokolov; Playing With Our Food; The Wall Street Journal (New York); Nov 3, 2007."
betide \bi-TYD\	"verb tr., intr. To happen. [From Old English tidan (happen), from tid (time). Earliest documented use: 1297.] ""Whatever betided at the end of Mitt Romney's term and whatever betides in the future, that shouldn't be forgotten."" - David A. Mittell Jr.; As the Good Times Roll; Providence Journal (Rhode Island); May 17, 2007."
benthic \BEN-thik\	"adjective Of or relating to the bottom of a sea or lake. [From Greek benthos (depth of the sea). Earliest documented use: 1902.] ""Tuesday night, despite benthic scores once again, Brissie and partner Mark Ballas survived another week on Dancing with the Stars."" - Your Daily Dose of Gossip; Philadelphia Inquirer (Pennsylvania); Nov 18, 2010."
captious \KAP-shuhs\	"adjective Inclined to find faults, especially of a trivial nature. [Via French from Latin capere (to seize). Ultimately from the Indo-European root kap- (to grasp), which is also the root of captive, capsule, capable, capture, cable, chassis, occupy, and deceive. Earliest documented use: 1380.] ""Simon Cowell, the breathtakingly captious judge on American Idol, has dashed more dreams than an alarm clock."" - David Hiltbrand; 'Idol' Hands are This Devil's Workshop, As He Rakes Teen Dreams Over the Coals; The San Diego Union-Tribune; Aug 4, 2002."
expostulate \ik-SPOS-chuh-layt\	"verb intr. To reason earnestly with someone in order to dissuade. [From Latin expostulare (to require), from ex- (intensive prefix) + postulare (to demand). Ultimately from the Indo-European root prek- (to ask), which is also the source of words such as pray, precarious, deprecate, postulate, and precatory. Earliest documented use: 1548.] ""'Oh come on,' I expostulated, a shade too loudly. 'That's not fair.'"" - Sarabjit Jagirdar; Amar's Little Secret; Hindustan Times (New Delhi, India); Feb 7, 2010."
bathetic \buh-THET-ik\	"adjective Characterized by triteness or sentimentalism [When English speakers turned ""apathy"" into ""apathetic"" in the 1700s, using the suffix ""-etic"" to turn the noun into the adjective, they were inspired by ""pathetic,"" the adjectival form of ""pathos,"" from Greek ""pathetikos."" People also applied that bit of linguistic transformation to coin ""bathetic."" In the 19th century, English speakers added the suffix ""-etic"" to ""bathos,"" the Greek word for ""depth,"" which in English has come to mean ""triteness"" or ""excessive sentimentalism."" The result: the ideal adjective for the incredibly commonplace or the overly sentimental.] ""Just before Ms. MacGraw utters the deathless catchphrase 'Love means never having to say you’re sorry,' Crimson Key members loudly implore her, 'Don't say it!' At the conclusion, when Mr. O'Neal repeats her bathetic utterance, they shout, 'Plagiarist!' And so it goes."""
tog \TAHG\	"verb To dress especially in fine clothing -- usually used with up or out. [The history of ""tog"" is a true rags-to-riches tale that begins with the slang of vagabonds and thieves -- specifically, with the noun ""togeman,"" an old (and now obsolete) slang word meaning ""cloak."" By the early 18th century, the noun ""tog,"" a shortened form of ""togeman,"" was being used as a slang word for ""coat,"" and before the century's end the plural form ""togs"" was being used to mean ""clothing."" The verb ""tog"" debuted shortly after ""togs"" and was immediately in style as a word for dressing up. You may be wondering if there's a connection between ""tog"" and ""toga,"" and if so, you are right on track. ""Togeman"" is believed to be derived in part from ""toga,"" which means ""cloak"" or ""mantle"" in Latin.] ""Brolin is togged out in 20 pounds of woolen Civil War-era clothing, including a floor-length duster, for one of the movie's opening scenes."""
inosculate \in-OS-kyuh-layt\	"verb tr., intr. To join or unite. [From Latin in- (within) + osculare (to provide with a mouth), from osculum (little mouth), from os (mouth). Also see osculate. Earliest documented use: 1683.] ""The frozen images of delicate leaves and inosculating branches. The still street, the black windows of the other houses! What a time to be awake!"""
procumbent \pro-KUM-buhnt\	"adjective 1. Lying face down; prone; prostrate. 2. Of a plant: Growing along the ground without putting new roots. [From Latin procumbent- (bending forward), present participle of procumbere (to lean forward), from pro- (forward) + cumbere (to lie down). Earliest documented use: 1668.] ""You could lie procumbent on the beach, spot whales and dolphins at some remote shore or daydream of nasty officemates tripping and falling into that lovely volcano."" - Aloha Tales; American Theatre (New York); May 2004. ""Ground covers and procumbent shrubs are ideal for embankments and low garden borders."" - Valerie and Gerry Zwart; Tourism Blossoms; Sunshine Coast Daily (Australia); Aug 14, 2009."
helot \HEL-uht, HEE-luht\	"noun A serf or slave. [After Helos, a town in Laconia in ancient Greece, whose inhabitants were enslaved. First recorded use: 1579. Another word derived from the name of a town in Laconia is spartan, which is coined after Sparta, the capital of Laconia. And Laconia has a word coined after it too: laconic.] ""Many wind up in jobs irrelevant to their training. That helot frothing your coffee expected to become a barrister, not a barista."""
milliner \MIL-uh-nuhr\	"noun Someone who designs, makes, or sells women's hats. [After Milan, Italy, from where women's wares were imported. First recorded use: 1530. The word used to appear as the derogatory term ""man milliner"" implying someone who busies himself with trifling occupations. Poet Robert Southey said in 1796: ""I look upon a man milliner not only as one of the most despicable members of society, but as one of the most injurious."" The term for someone who deals in men's furnishings is haberdasher.] ""James Faulkner is not your average milliner. At 27 years old, he is making a name for himself in the world of fashion with unique headgear made from roadkill."""
earwig \EER-wig\	"verb To annoy or attempt to influence by private talk. [Earwigs are small insects that were once thought to crawl into the ears of sleeping people. This isn't true -- earwigs prefer moist, dark places under leaves and rocks to human ears -- but the superstition led people to name the insect ""earwicga,"" Old English for ""ear insect."" Over time, people connected the idea of having an insect in one's ear to situations that involve whispering or speaking privately into someone's ear. The noun ""earwig"" came to also mean ""a whispering busybody"" (though this sense is now considered archaic), and the verb ""earwig"" evolved to refer to the acts of such meddlers. In British English, the word is more commonly used to mean ""eavesdrop,"" as in ""earwigged on their conversation at the party.""] ""In Mississippi's casual sociality, lawyers see judges on hunting trips and at cocktail parties, and sometimes visit them privately in chambers. Occasionally, talk turns to the subject of a case pending before the court. Such ex-parte communication -- or 'earwigging,' as it's more commonly known -- is a technical violation of ethics standards, but it is hardly rare, and is usually harmless."""
verdigris \VUHR-di-grees, -gris, -gree\	"noun A bluish-green patina formed on copper, brass, and bronze when exposed to air or water for a long time. [From Old French verte grez (green of Greece). It was earlier used as a pigment by artists. The Greek connection is not clear. Earliest documented use: 1336.] ""The time capsule, made of copper, showed the verdigris of age."" - Jacqueline L. Urgo; Time Capsule Reveals 1936 Atlantic City; The Philadelphia Inquirer; Jul 14, 2010."
plaguey \PLAY-ghee\	"adjective Causing irritation or annoyance; troublesome. [Plagues have, well, ""plagued"" humanity for centuries. One sense of the word ""plague,"" referring to a deadly fever transmitted from rodents to humans by way of infected fleas, was all too familiar to English speakers in the late 16th century. That's when the word ""plaguey"" first appeared on the scene as an adjective describing something relating, literally or figuratively, to a plague. The fact that ""plaguey"" developed its ""annoying"" meaning by the end of that same century suggests just how familiar, and troublesome, the disease was in those days. ""Plaguey"" is also sometimes used as an adverb meaning ""irritatingly,"" as in ""it is plaguey cold."" (The form ""plaguily"" is occasionally seen as well, with the same meaning.)] ""What about monks? What about those stories I read as a boy featuring solitary genius inventors, working away at their crazy later-famous tasks, uninterrupted by plaguey human contact?"""
caitiff \KAY-tif\	"noun A cowardly and despicable person. adjective Cowardly, despicable. [Via French from Latin captivus (captive), from capere (to seize). Ultimately from the Indo-European root kap- (to grasp), which is also the root of captive, capsule, capable, capture, cable, chassis, occupy, deceive, captious, and gaff. Earliest documented use: Before 1300.] ""I followed him through the streets, listening to his rant, the insults directed at me for knowing cutpurses and caitiffs, and how dare I lead him into such dens of ordure."" - Frank McCourt; From an Affair with Books to a Book Fair; The New York Times; Sep 19, 1997."
vicissitude \vi-SIS-i-tood, -tyood\	"noun 1. A change or variation. The quality of being changeable; mutability. 2. Often vicissitudes. One of the sudden or unexpected changes or shifts often encountered in one's life, activities, or surroundings. [""Change is not made without inconvenience, even from worse to better,"" wrote British theologian Richard Hooker in the 16th century. That observation may shed some light on ""vicissitude,"" a word that can refer simply to the fact of change, or to an instance of it, but that often refers specifically to hardship or difficulty brought about by change. To survive ""the vicissitudes of life"" is thus to survive life's ups and downs, with special emphasis on the downs. ""Vicissitude"" is a descendant of the Latin noun ""vicis,"" meaning ""change"" or ""alternation,"" and it has been a part of the English language since the 16th century. In contemporary usage, it most often occurs in the plural. Latin vicissitudo, from vicissim, in turn, probably from vices, pl. of *vix, change.] ""In Jiang's speech, he noted, `People of my age have all experienced vicissitudes of the current century.'"""
emprise \em-PRYZE\	"noun 1. A chivalrous or adventurous enterprise. 2. Chivalrous daring or skill. [Someone who engages in emprises undertakes much, so it's no surprise that ""emprise"" descends from the Anglo-French word ""emprendre,"" meaning ""to undertake."" It's also no surprise that ""emprise"" became established in English during the 13th century, a time when brave knights engaged in many a chivalrous undertaking. Fourteenth-century author Geoffrey Chaucer used ""emprise"" to describe one such knight in ""The Franklin's Tale"" (one of the stories in The Canterbury Tales): ""Ther was a knyght that loved and dide his payne / To serve a lady in his beste wise; / And many labour, many a greet emprise, / He for his lady wroghte er she were wonne.""] ""Thus did the politic chief touch all the secret springs of devotion, honour, and ambition in the bosoms of his martial audience, waking the mettle of the most sluggish before leading him on the perilous emprise."" William H. Prescott, History Of The Conquest Of Mexico, 1843."
brummagem \BRUM-ih-jum\	"adjective Not genuine, spurious; also, cheaply showy, tawdry. [""Brummagem"" first appeared in the 17th century as an alteration of ""Birmingham,"" the name of a city in England. At that time Birmingham was notorious for the counterfeit coins made there, and the word ""brummagem"" quickly became associated with things forged or inauthentic. By the 19th century, Birmingham had become a chief manufacturer of cheap trinkets and gilt jewelry, and again the word ""brummagem"" followed suit -- it came to describe that which is showy on the outside but essentially of low quality. Perhaps the term was something of an annoyance to the people of Birmingham way back when, but nowadays ""brummagem"" is usually used without any conscious reference to the British city.] ""Just as critics ... conceived high culture in some antithetical relationship to 'middlebrow' or 'kitsch,' which imitated the intelligentsia's culture and blurred the distinction between commodity and art, so too, they warned, the spirit of Christianity now had to be preserved from its brummagem versions...."""
cabbage \KAB-ij\ (verb sense)	"verb Steal, filch. [Does the ""filching"" meaning of ""cabbage"" bring to mind an image of thieves sneaking out of farm fields with armloads of pilfered produce? If so, you're in for a surprise. Today's featured word has nothing to do with the leafy vegetable. It originally referred to the practice among tailors of pocketing part of the cloth given to them to make garments. The verb was cut from the same cloth as an older British noun ""cabbage,"" which meant ""pieces of cloth left in cutting out garments and traditionally kept by tailors as perquisites."" Both of those ethically questionable ""cabbages"" probably derived from ""cabas,"" the Middle French word for ""cheating or theft."" The ""cabbage"" found in cole slaw, on the other hand, comes from Middle English ""caboche,"" which means ""head.""] ""He cabbaged parts from sources that ranged from an old washing machine wringer to the cam shaft from a six-cylinder Chevrolet engine."""
eidos \EYE-dos, AY-\ plural eide \EYE-dee, AY-day\	"noun The formal sum of a culture, its intellectual character, ideas, etc. [From Greek eidos (form, idea), ultimately from the Indo-European root weid- (to see), which is the source of words such as wise, view, supervise, wit, and eidetic. Earliest recorded use: 1936.] ""Picture, if you will, honey, the eidos of repulsive: plaid upholstered chairs, with ruffled skirts, all hideously brown and yellow."" - Christopher Coe; Such Times; Penguin Books; 1994."
bailiwick \BAY-luh-wik\	"noun A person's area of expertise or interest. [From Middle English bailliwik, from bailie (bailiff), from bail (custody), from Latin baiulare (to serve as porter) + Middle English wick (dairy farm or village), from Old English wic (house or village), from Latin vicus (neighborhood). Ultimately from the Indo-European root weik- (clan), which is also the forebear of vicinity, village, villa, and villain (originally, a villain was a farm servant, one who lived in a villa or a country house), ecumenical, and ecesis. Earliest documented use: 1460.] ""Ms. Sarah Palin took the extraordinary step Tuesday of filing an ethics complaint against herself, making the matter fall within the bailiwick of the personnel board. Her lawyer Mr. Van Flein then asked the Legislature to drop its inquiry."""
lacuna \luh-KYOO-nuh\ plural lacunae (luh-KYOO-nee) or lacunas	"noun An empty space, gap, missing part, an opening. [From Latin lacuna (hole, gap), from lacus (lake). Earliest documented use: 1663.] ""Last week's collision between two cargo ships off the coast of Mumbai has exposed several systemic lacunae."" - Black Waters; The Times of India (New Delhi, India); Aug 11, 2010."
fomes \FOH-meez\ plural fomites \FOM-i-teez, FOH-mi-teez\	"noun An object (for example, clothing or bedding) capable of absorbing and transmitting infectious organisms from one person to another. [The word is usually used in its plural form fomites, which has led to the back-formation of a new singular form fomite. Another example of a word coined in a similar way is pea (from pease, which was erroneously believed to be a plural). From Latin fomes (kindling wood), from fovere (to warm). Earliest documented use: 1658.] ""The sitters didn't catch the virus at all. The cuddlers did, and so did the touchers, pointing up the importance of direct contact with secretions, but especially of fomites -- objects and surfaces with infectious viral particles still on them."""
snaffle \SNAFF-ul\	"verb To obtain especially by devious or irregular means. [The origins of ""snaffle"" are shrouded in mystery. What we know of its story begins in the 16th century -- at that time, ""snaffle"" existed as both a noun referring to a simple bit for a horse's bridle and a verb meaning ""to fit or equip with a snaffle"" or ""to restrain or check with or as if with a snaffle."" The noun could be from an old German word for mouth, ""snavel,"" but the connection has not been confirmed. The ""obtain"" meaning of the verb appeared in the early 18th century, and its origins are similarly elusive. A 1699 dictionary entered ""snaffle"" with the definition ""a Highwayman that has got Booty"" -- that's a logical derivative of the verb, but it is also unconfirmed.] ""Started on Tyneside in the late 1930s, the chain has expanded by snaffling up other bakeries...."""
dispensation /dis-puhn-SEY-shuhn/	noun 1. Exemption from a rule or usual requirement. 2. A system of order, government or organization of a nation, community, etc. 3. Archaic. An act of divine providence. 4. The action of distributing or supplying something.
lapidary /LAP-i-der-ee/	"adjective 1. Relating to precious stones or cutting and polishing them. 2. Having elegance, precision, or refinement suggestive of gem cutting. noun 1. One who cuts, polishes, or deals in precious stones. 2. The art of cutting and polishing gems. [From Latin lapis (stone). Earliest documented use: 1382.] ""The event will feature live and silent auctions of minerals and fossils ... and demonstrations of lapidary and jewelry making."" - Earth Science Show Planned; Naperville Sun (Illinois); Feb 8, 2011. ""The beauty of this film is in its lapidary details, which sparkle with feeling and surprise."" - Carina Chocano; Movie Review: Babel; Los Angeles Times; Oct 27, 2006."
schwarmerei \shver-muh-RY\	"noun 1. Extravagant enthusiasm. 2. Excessive sentimentality. [From Schwärmerei (enthusiasm), from schwärmen (to swarm, to be wild or mad about). Earliest documented use: 1845.] ""True fulfillment flowed solely from whatever they had in common, for that was always a condition of schwarmerei."""
diktat \dik-TAT\	"noun 1. An order or decree imposed without popular consent. 2. A harsh settlement imposed upon a defeated party. [From German Diktat (command, order, dictation), from Latin dictatum (something dictated), from dictare (to dictate), frequentative of dicere (to say). Ultimately from the Indo-European root deik- (to show, to pronounce solemnly), which is also the source of words such as judge, verdict, vendetta, revenge, indicate, dictate, paradigm, interdict, and fatidic. Earliest documented use: 1922, in reference to the Treaty of Versailles of 1919, by Germany.] ""Public participation in politics [in China] may not yet be approaching the raucousness in India, but it is equally incorrect to view the Chinese as obedient zombies silently following the State's every diktat."""
sitzfleisch \SITZ-flaish, ZITS-\	"noun 1. The ability to sit through or tolerate something boring. 2. The ability to endure or persist in a task. [From German Sitzfleisch, from sitzen (to sit) + Fleisch (flesh). Earliest documented use: Before 1930. Sitzfleisch is a fancy term for what's commonly known as chair glue: the ability to sit still and get through the task at hand. It's often the difference between, for example, an aspiring writer and a writer. Sometimes the word is used in the sense of the ability to sit out a problem -- ignore it long enough in the hope it will go away.] ""Some prominent seats go to those with prominence. Others go to those with Sitzfleisch, like Representative Eliot L. Engel. Every year since 1989, the Bronx Democrat has won a prime spot at the State of the Union Address simply by showing up early and sitting in it."""
collop \KAH-lup\	"noun 1. A small piece or slice especially of meat. 2. A fold of fat flesh. [The word ""collop"" is fat with meaning. It originated as a Middle-English word for an egg fried on bacon and later for the slice of bacon itself. In 18th-century Great Britain, it began designating the Monday before Shrove Tuesday. Traditionally, on ""Collop Monday"" fried bacon and eggs were eaten. The word was also extended to refer to any slice of meat, as in ""collops of lobster,"" and to a fold of flesh on the body. In addition, the word can be used figuratively to refer to any piece of something -- for example, in Sir Walter Scott's novel Waverley we find ""a 'collop of the foray,' or, in plainer words, a portion of the robber's booty.""] ""You put the collops of meat in a pan with wine, marjoram, shallots and bacon."""
corniche \KOR-nish, kor-NEESH\	"noun A coastal road, especially one cut into the side of a cliff. [From French route en corniche, from Italian cornice (frame, ledge), perhaps from Latin cornix (crow), from its resemblance to the beak of a crow. Earliest documented use: 1837.] ""The median strip on the corniche has a magical open-air museum. """
gorgonize or gorgonise \GOR-guh-nyz\	"verb tr. To paralyze, petrify, or hypnotize. [In Greek mythology, the Gorgons (from the Greek adjective ""gorgos,"" meaning ""terrifying"") were commonly depicted as three female monsters Stheno, Euryale, and Medusa who had snakes for hair and the ability to turn anyone who looked at them into stone. The most notorious of the three was Medusa; when she was slain by the hero Perseus, her severed head retained the power of turning anyone who looked on it to stone. In modern parlance, to gorgonize someone is to make him or her feel (metaphorically) petrified, usually through an intimidating glance or gaze.] ""Izzy asked Sol why he was willing to take us. She gave him a look that would gorgonize."" — From W.S. Milner's 2001 book In Translation"
aver \uh-VUR\	"verb To assert as true. ""Between us and the bottom of the sea was less than an inch of wood. And yet, I aver it, and I aver it again, I was unafraid."""
batten \BAT-un\ (verb sense)	"verb 1. a) To grow or make fat. b) To feed gluttonously. 2. To grow prosperous especially at the expense of another -- usually used with on. [The origin of today's word is believed to be the Old Norse verb ""batna,"" meaning ""to improve."" ""Batna"" is akin to Old Norse ""betr"" and Old English ""betera,"" from which we get the modern English word ""better."" ""Batten"" entered the English language in the late 1500s with the meaning ""to improve,"" and was especially used in the sense of improving or thriving by feeding. It is not related to the verb ""batten"" found in expressions such as ""batten down the hatches."" This latter ""batten"" comes from the noun ""batten,"" which denotes, among other things, an iron bar used to secure the covering of a hatchway on a ship. This ""batten"" has Latinate rather than Germanic origins, and can be traced back through Anglo-French ""batre"" to the Latin verb ""battuere"" (""to beat"").] ""At the same time, others who had battened on the business of originating mortgages -- thousands of small-time mortgage brokers -- went out of business."""
insouciant \in-SOO-see-uhnt\	"adjective Happily unconcerned; carefree; nonchalant. [From French insouciant, from in- (not) + souciant, present participle of soucier (to care), from Vulgar Latin sollicitare (to vex), from Latin sollicitus (anxious), from sollus (entire) + citus, past participle of ciere (to move).] ""[John] Brisker also voiced a strong loyalty to Seattle, the likes of which are rare among many of today's pro athletes who are insouciant about where they play."" - Robert L. Jamieson Jr.; Former Sonic Forever Shrouded in Mystery; Seattle Post-Intelligencer; Jul 2, 2004."
perspicacious \puhr-spi-KAY-shuhs\	"adjective Having keen mental perception and discernment. [""Perspicacious"" is similar in meaning to ""shrewd"" and ""astute,"" but a sharp mind will discern subtle differences among them. All three mean acute in perception and sound in judgment, but ""shrewd"" stresses practical, hardheaded cleverness, whereas ""perspicacious"" implies unusual power to see through and comprehend what is puzzling or hidden. (You can see this shade of meaning in the root of ""perspicacious"" -- the Latin word ""perspicere,"" meaning ""to look through"" or ""to see clearly."") ""Astute"" suggests both shrewdness and perspicacity, as well as diplomatic skill.] ""I have to take my hat off to Jean Cocteau, whose perspicaciousness enabled him to predict the current thriving anime scene back in the early 1950s."""
nonplus \nahn-PLUS\	"verb To put at a loss for what to do, think, or say; perplex. noun A state of perplexity or bewilderment. [Does ""nonplus"" perplex you? You aren't alone. Some people believe the ""non"" in ""nonplus"" means ""not"" and assume that to be ""nonplussed"" is to be calm and poised when just the opposite is true. If you are among the baffled, the word's history may clarify things. In Latin, ""non plus"" means ""no more."" When ""nonplus"" debuted in English in the 16th century, it was used as a noun synonymous with ""quandary."" Someone brought to a nonplus had reached an impasse in an argument and could say no more. Within 10 years of the first known use of the noun, people began using ""nonplus"" as a verb, and today it is often used in participial form with the meaning ""perplexed"" (as in ""Joellen's nasty remark left us utterly nonplussed"").] ""Until this encounter, my only knowledge of codes was the Navajo Code Talkers, the World War II Native American group who used their native language to nonplus the enemy."" - Jane Greig; Higshmrk E Qcwxivc (No, That's Not A Typo); Austin American Statesman; Sep 14, 2003. ""Larger seeds, such as corn, peas, beans and squash, may be planted the usual way, then immediately covered with a loose hay mulch, 1 or 2 inches thick. Covering the corn seeds nonpluses the crows."" - Ruth Stout; The Couch I Live On; Organic Gardening (New York); Jul 17, 1996."
taradiddle or tarradiddle \tar-uh-DID-l\	"noun 1. A petty lie. 2. Pretentious nonsense. [Origin unknown. Earliest documented use: 1796.] ""This investment is pure puffery and taradiddle."" - Malcolm Berko; Taking Stock; The State Journal-Register (Springfield, Illinois); Apr 26, 2010."
farouche \fuh-ROOSH\	"adjective 1. Unruly or disorderly; wild. 2. Marked by shyness and lack of social graces. [In French, ""farouche"" can mean wild or shy, just as it does in English. It is an alteration of the Old French word ""forasche,"" which derives via Late Latin ""forasticus"" (""living outside"") from Latin ""foras,"" meaning ""outdoors."" In its earliest English uses, in the middle of the 18th century, ""farouche"" was used to describe someone who was awkward in social situations, perhaps as one who has lived apart from groups of people. The word can also mean ""disorderly,"" as in ""farouche ruffians out to cause trouble.""] ""The writer's publicist was often frustrated by her client, who was urbane and eloquent on the page but farouche when it came to meeting with fans and giving interviews."""
soubrette \soo-BRET\	"noun 1. A maidservant or lady's maid in a play or an opera, especially one who displays coquetry and engages in intrigue. 2. A young woman regarded as flirtatious. 3. A soprano who sings supporting roles in comic opera. [From French soubrette (maidservant), from Provençal soubreto, feminine of soubret (coy), from soubra (to set aside), from Latin superare (to be above). Ultimately from the Indo-European root uper (over) which is also the source of over, sovereign, super, supreme, sirloin, soprano, somersault, and hyper. Earliest documented use: 1753.] ""Paloma Herrera played the soubrette who lures the hero from his longtime girlfriend, abandoning her own fiancé in the process."" - Elizabeth Zimmer; Stars in Alignment; The Australian (Sydney); Aug 1, 2009. ""Rebecca Bottone's light soubrette contrasts well with Watts's more voluptuous timbre."" - Hugh Canning; Catch Her If You Can; The Sunday Times (London, UK); Nov 8, 2009."
bumf \bumf\	"noun Unwanted or uninteresting printed matter such as governmental forms, legal documents, junk mail, promotional pamphlets, etc. [Short for bum fodder, slang for toilet paper. Earliest documented use: 1889.] ""A mortgage loan can generate 200 pages of bumf, most of it so boring and repetitious that no one has the energy or the time to read it all."" - John Gilmour; Lenders Use The Hoover Principle; The Sydney Morning Herald (Australia); Jan 20, 2001."
coquette \koh-ket\	noun A woman who flirts lightheartedly with men to win their admiration and affection; flirt.
Ruritanian \rur-uh-TAY-nee-un\	"adjective Of, relating to, or having the characteristics of an imaginary place of high romance. [In 1894, British author Anthony Hope published The Prisoner of Zenda, a novel set in the mythical kingdom of Ruritania. The book relates the adventures of Rudolf Rassendyll, a British gentleman who impersonates the king of Ruritania to save him from a treasonous plot. An improbable but high-spirited tale filled with heroes, villains, courtly intrigue, romance, and sword play, Hope's narrative (and its fictional locale) quickly captured the imagination of the public. Within two years of the novel's publication, George Bernard Shaw had seen fit to use ""Ruritanian"" as a generic adjective: ""Our common sense ... must immediately put a summary stop to the somewhat silly Ruritanian gambols of our imagination."" Romantic or fanciful places or things have been ""Ruritanian"" ever since.] ""Popular mythology has it that teleworkers all live in Ruritanian bliss in the wilds of Wales with only sheep as neighbours."" - Ross Clark, Property: The middle of nowhere will not do, The Daily Telegraph, 25 Jul 1998."
beau geste \bo ZHEST\ plural beaux gestes (bo ZHEST\	"noun A gracious, but often meaningless, gesture. [From French, literally fine gesture. Earliest documented use: 1920.] ""An effective encore doesn't risk becoming an empty beau geste; it is an emotional p.s. somehow relating to the mood of the written program."""
conventicle \kun-VEN-tih-kul\	"noun An assembly of an irregular or unlawful character. [""Conventicle"" comes to us from Latin ""conventiculum"" and ultimately from ""convenire,"" meaning ""to assemble."" ""Conventiculum"" means ""place of assembly"" (it was applied in particular to Roman Christian meetinghouses) or simply ""assembly."" The English ""conventicle"" also originally meant ""assembly."" It then developed an application to illegal meetings, which, in turn, led to the arrival of a sense describing secret meetings for worship in a religion proscribed by law. And finally, ""conventicle"" developed a sense of ""meetinghouse,"" echoing the earlier use of ""conventiculum.""] ""In 18th-century England, it was a capital offense to preach in any conventicle."""
stultify \STUL-tuh-fye\	"verb 1. To cause to appear stupid, foolish, or absurdly illogical. 2. a) To negate or impair. b) To have a dulling or inhibiting effect on. [Stupid or absurd behavior can be almost laughable at times. That's the kind of situation depicted in an 1871 London Daily News article, describing how a witness ""stultified himself"" by admitting that he was too far off to hear what he had claimed to have heard. But there is nothing especially funny about the now-archaic original usage of ""stultify."" The word was first used in the mid-1700s in legal contexts, where if you stultified yourself, you claimed to be of unsound mind and thus not responsible for your acts. Nor is there humor in the most common meaning of ""stultify"" nowadays, that of rendering someone or something useless or ineffective.] ""Without continuing support for higher education, we will stultify our national progress and go down a vicious spiral of ever-diminishing returns."""
compurgator \KAHM-per-gay-ter\	"noun One who under oath vouches for the character or conduct of an accused person. [""Compurgator"" is a descendant of the Latin verb ""compurgare,"" meaning ""to purify wholly."" The root of that word, ""purgare,"" also gave English ""purge"" (""to clear of guilt,"" ""to cause evacuation from,"" or ""to get rid of"") and ""expurgate"" (""to cleanse of something morally harmful, offensive, or erroneous""). ""Compurgator"" has occasionally been used in a more general sense of ""one who supports or defends another,"" but its primary application is to the specific legal situation in which someone appears in court as a character witness for the defendant. ""Compurgator"" has been used in English with this specific legal meaning since the 16th century.] ""To clear himself, the defendant required corroboration from a prescribed number of compurgators or 'oath-helpers,' which varied according to the nature and severity of the accusation. Neither the defendant nor his compurgators were required to present any evidence to the court."""
nodus \NOH-duhs\ plural nodi \NOH-dy\	"noun A complicated situation or problem. [From Latin nodus (knot). Ultimately from the Indo-European root ned- (to bind), which is also the source of node, noose, annex, connect, ouch, nettle, and denouement. Earliest documented use: before 1400.] ""The CPC project is a nodus of interests. A half of its stock belongs to the governments of three states: Russia, Kazakhstan, and Sultanate of Oman. The remainder is in private hands."""
gris-gris or grigri or greegree \GREE-gree\	"noun A charm, amulet, or fetish. [From French, of West African origin. Earliest documented use: 1698.] ""The marabout [a Muslim holy man] produced a small calculator, punched in some numbers, and quoted a price of more than a thousand dollars for the gris-gris. 'With it you can walk across the entire desert and no one will harm you,' he promised."" - Peter Gwin; The Telltale Scribes of Timbuktu; National Geographic (Washington, DC); Jan 2011."
entrepot \AHN-truh-po\	"noun A place, such as a warehouse, port, or trading center, to which goods are brought for distribution to other parts of the world. [From French entrepôt (warehouse), from entreposer (to store), from entre (among) + poser (to place). Earliest documented use: 1721.] ""Jerusalem is a city that has never made anything but history. It is not an entrepot, a manufactory, a place of finance, or a crossroads."""
disseise \dih-SEEZ\	"verb To put out of possession or occupancy; dispossess. [""Disseise,"" ""seisin"" (""the possession of land or chattels""), and ""seize"" are all 13th-century words derived from the Anglo-French word ""seisir,"" meaning ""to put in possession of."" That's the original meaning of English ""seize"" as well. (""Seize"" can also be spelled ""seise"" in that sense.) The Magna Carta (the great charter of liberties, originally written in Medieval Latin and signed in 1215) is perhaps the most frequently quoted use of the word ""disseise"": ""No free man shall be ... disseised ... except by the lawful judgment of his peers or by the law of the land.""] ""The complainant declared that he or she had been disseised -- usually physically and sometimes even violently deprived -- of land unjustly and without judgment of a court."""
condign \kun-DYNE\	"adjective Deserved, appropriate. [In his 1755 Dictionary of the English Language, lexicographer Samuel Johnson noted that ""condign"" was ""always used of something deserved by crimes."" Even today, it is most likely to be used to modify ""punishment"" or a related word, such as ""redress,"" ""justice,"" or ""chastisement."" And yet, ""condign"" (which traces to Latin ""com-,"" meaning ""thoroughly,"" and ""dignus,"" meaning ""worthy"") once meant ""worthy"" or ""of equal worth or dignity"" in English. How did such a word get chained to ""punishment""? It was apparently so condemned in the 1500s by the phraseology of the Tudor Acts of Parliament: ""Former statutes ... for lacke of condigne punishment ... be littell feared or regarded.""] ""Anger is not a great human accomplishment, even when it is a condign response to events."" - Leon Wieseltier; The First Palestinian-Israeli War; The New Republic (Washington, DC); Apr 15, 2002. ""But the doolally behaviour continued and his [soldier's] superiors considered more condign punishment."" - Sian Busby; Shell Shock and Awe; The Times (London, UK); Aug 21, 2004."
biophilia \bye-oh-FILL-ee-uh\	"noun A hypothetical human tendency to interact or be closely associated with other forms of life in nature. [The term ""biophilia"" was popularized by psychoanalyst Erich Fromm in the 1960s. In his work, he used the word (from ""bio-,"" meaning ""life,"" and ""-philia,"" meaning ""friendly feeling toward"") to describe the biological drive toward self-preservation. In the late 1970s, American biologist Edward O. Wilson extended the word's meaning, seeing it as the perfect word for ""the rich, natural pleasure that comes from being surrounded by living organisms."" Recently, ""biophilia"" has been in the news as the title of Icelandic singer Bjork's latest project, a multimedia production that (according to the website for the Manchester International Festival) ""celebrates how sound works in nature, exploring the infinite expanse of the universe, from planetary systems to atomic structure.""] ""For some, biophilia manifests itself in such ordinary ways as, say, owning four or five house cats. For myself and others ... it means flying to the other side of the globe to see a fruit bat, a duck-billed platypus, or a parrotfish."""
calliopean \kuh-ly-uh-PEE-uhn\	"adjective Piercingly loud. [After calliope, a musical instrument having a series of steam whistles played by a keyboard. The instrument was named after Kalliope, the Muse of heroic poetry in Greek mythology, from Greek kalli- (beautiful) + ops (voice). Earliest documented use: 1855.] ""Sunday we were doing yardwork when our ears perked to one of the season's unmistakable aural cues... the calliopean siren's song of the ice cream truck."""
emend \ih-mend\	verb 1. To edit or change (a text). 2. To correct.
vitrine \vuh-TREEN\	"noun A glass showcase or cabinet especially for displaying fine wares or specimens. [The history of ""vitrine"" is clear as glass. It comes to English by way of the Old French word ""vitre,"" meaning ""pane of glass,"" from Latin ""vitrum,"" meaning ""glass."" ""Vitrum"" has contributed a number of words to the English language besides ""vitrine."" ""Vitreous"" (""resembling glass"" or ""relating to, derived from, or consisting of glass"") is the most common of these. ""Vitrify"" (""to convert or become converted into glass or into a glassy substance by heat and fusion"") is another. A much rarer ""vitrum"" word -- and one that also entered English by way of ""vitre"" -- is ""vitrailed,"" meaning ""fitted with stained glass.""] ""The tiny antiquarian bookshop has some books that are available for browsing, but the rarer and more valuable volumes are housed in the tall vitrines that line the walls."""
prosody \PROS-uh-dee\	noun 1. The science or study of poetic meters and versification. 2. A particular or distinctive system of metrics and versification: Milton's prosody. 3. Linguistics. The stress and intonation patterns of an utterance.
shirty \SHUHR-tee\	"adjective Bad-tempered, irritable. [From the expression ""to get someone's shirt out"" to annoy or to lose one's temper. Earliest documented use: 1846.] ""We can appreciate why Lukie Muhlemann is a little agitated and shirty, but he should remember that CSFB is essentially a law unto itself."""
pantywaist \PAN-tee-wayst\	"noun An weak or effeminate man. adjective Weak; cowardly; effeminate. [A pantywaist was formerly a child's undergarment in which a shirt and pants were buttoned together at the waist. Earliest documented use: 1910.] ""The question on many people's minds: Will the genteel Mr. Creel, more comfortable buried in legal briefs than in the trenches of hand-to-throat political combat, be able to respond in kind? He doesn't see himself as a political pantywaist."""
jalousie \JAL-uh-see\	"noun 1. A blind with adjustable horizontal slats for admitting light and air while excluding direct sun and rain. 2. A window made of adjustable glass louvers that control ventilation. [Etymologists are clear on the source of the word ""jalousie"" -- it's French for ""jealousy"" -- but the relationship between the emotion and the window treatments originally referred to as jalousies is not something they've speculated much about. Is it that those peering out through the original jalousie blinds were jealous of the people outside? Or is it more likely that the jealousy festered in the hearts of those outside, who could see the blinds but not the faces and lives of the people they hid? This excerpt from the October 23, 1766 entry in the Duchess of Northumberland's diary perhaps provides a clue: ""Rows of Seats with Jalousies in Front that [the women] may not be seen.""] ""The rooms of the little bungalow were protected from the brutal tropical heat by wooden jalousies."""
Jonah \JOH-nuh\	"noun One believed to bring bad luck. [After Jonah, a prophet in the Old Testament, whose presence on a ship was believed to bring a storm. He was thrown overboard and swallowed by a fish or a whale and returned three days later. From Latin Jonas, Greek Ionas, from Hebrew yonah (dove). Earliest documented use: 1612.] ""Chairman Ned Sullivan is a Jonah of the corporate world. Ned is a chairman of the currently disastrous McInerney Properties. McInerney shares have collapsed from €2.50 twelve months ago to today's price of 57¢."" - Shane Ross; Ghosts Haunt Greencore; The Sunday Independent (Dublin, Ireland); Jun 29, 2008."
Jezebel \JEZ-uh-bel\	"noun A shameless, wicked, or immoral woman. [After Jezebel, the wife of King Ahab in the Old Testament, who was defenestrated and killed for not worshiping the right god. Earliest documented use: 1558.] ""Olive's not just clever but, in her unshowy way, more saintly than the people who call her a Jezebel."" - Sukhdev Sandhu; Top of the Class; The Daily Telegraph (London, UK); Oct 22, 2010."
jehu \JEE-hyoo, -hoo\	"noun 1. A fast driver. 2. A driver of a cab. [After King Jehu in the Old Testament, known for driving his chariot furiously. He had Jezebel killed. Earliest documented use: 1682.] ""The jehu cabby was charged with street betting."" - Robert Hale; Undercover Cop Nabs Gamblers; Malvern Gazette (UK); May 8, 2008."
jorum \JOHR-uhm\	"noun 1. A large drinking vessel or its contents. 2. A great quantity. [Perhaps after Joram, a character in the Old Testament, who took vessels of silver, gold, and brass to King David. Earliest documented use: 1730.] ""He sought for more liquor, found it, and poured himself a big jorum."" - J. Allan Dunn; Rimrock Trail; Doubleday; 1921."
anomia \uh-NOH-mee-uh\	"noun The inability to recall names of people or objects. [From Latin a- (without) + nom (name). Earliest documented use: 1900. Don't confuse the word with anomie.] ""In Dad's case of anomia, he's been calling his nightly can of beer 'ink'. Sometimes he calls it 'gas', which makes a kind of sense."" - Patricia Traxler; I'm Still Listening for My Father's Words; Newsweek (New York); Jun 11, 2007."
mucilaginous \myoo-suh-LAJ-uh-nus\	"adjective 1. Sticky, viscid. 2. Of, relating to, full of, or secreting mucilage. [Unlike its meanings, there's nothing terribly sticky about the origin and use of ""mucilaginous."" Like thousands of other words in the English language, ""mucilaginous"" (and the noun ""mucilage"") oozed out of Latin during the 15th century. ""Mucilage"" is from Late Latin's word for ""mucus,"" ""mucilago,"" and is used for the gelatinous substance found in various plants, such as legumes or seaweeds. ""Mucilaginous"" stuck as the noun's adjective form and is used by scientists and foodies alike for sticky or mucous things.] ""Meanwhile, the dried inner bark of slippery elm was being used by the Iroquois nations and the Algonquins. The mucilaginous powder made from pounding the inner bark is slippery when wet and soothes mucous membranes from the lining of our gut to the throat and nose."""
hey rube \hay roob\	"noun 1. A fight between members of a circus and the general public. 2. A call to rally circus members in a fight. [The term originated in the 19th century when circuses were rowdy affairs and ""Hey Rube"" was the rallying cry to call all circus people to help in a fight with townspeople. It's not clear whether Rube in this term was someone specific or simply a use of the informal term rube (shortened form of Reuben) for an unsophisticated person from a rural area. Earliest documented use: 1882.] ""'Hey, Rube,' they would yell. Roustabouts would soon be beating on the trouble-maker."""
necrology \nuh-KROL-uh-jee, neh-\	"noun 1. A list of those who have died during a specific period. 2. An obituary. [From Greek necro- (dead) + -logy (account). Earliest documented use: 1728.] ""The fare structure is one reason Independence Air has joined a necrology of low-cost carriers that stretches over four decades."" - Marc Fisher; We Loved That Airline To Death; Washington Post; Jan 5, 2006."
concupiscent \kon-KYOO-pih-suhnt\	"adjective Lustful; libidinous. [From Latin concupiscentia, from concupiscere (to desire ardently), from con- (intensive prefix) + cupere (to desire). Earliest documented use: around 1450.] ""The woman in the centre of the picture is a member of Gaddafi's cohort of female bodyguards, a policy no doubt admired by the famously concupiscent Italian PM."" - The World Through a Lens; The Observer (London, UK); Jun 14, 2009. ""I doubt even Mosiuoa Lekota would wish to emulate another concupiscent ruler from times past, one Solomon, who, we are told, had 700 official wives and 300 concubines. One can only wonder how much time old King Sol had left for his official duties."" - Andrea Meeson; Cadres and Concubines a Great Show; Sunday Independent (South Africa); Apr 12, 2009."
pomaceous \poh-MAY-shus\	"adjective 1. Of or relating to apples. 2. Resembling a pome. [""Pomaceous"" was first planted in the English language by physician Edward Baynard when, in 1706, he advised, ""Apples and pomaceous Juices, are the greatest Pectorals."" (""Pectoral"" is now a rarely used word for a food that helps digestion.) Since then, ""pomaceous"" has mainly been sown by botanists and poets. The word, which is ultimately derived from Late Latin ""pomum"" (meaning ""apple""), was originally used of apples and things relating to apples, but later it was also applied to things that look like pears. (Pears, like apples, belong to the pome family.)] ""The back porch held a sweet, pomaceous aroma, and immediately Glen knew that his mother had baked an apple pie for dessert."""
roué \roo-AY\	"noun A debauched man, especially an elderly man from a wealthy or aristocratic family. [""Roué"" originated as a French word and gained momentum when it began to be used in reference to the libertine companions of Philippe II, France's regent from 1715-1723. ""Roué"" means ""broken on the wheel"" in French and ultimately derives from Latin ""rota,"" meaning ""wheel."" Since the wheel being referred to was an instrument of punishment, the French were implying that such dissolute beings deserved this punishment. By the end of the 18th century, English-speakers added ""roué"" to its list of synonyms for a rake, libertine, debaucher, lecher, etc.] ""So when maidenhood has wandered into the moil of the city, when it is brought within the circle of the 'rounder' and the roué, even though it be at the outermost rim, they can come forth and use their alluring arts."""
mutatis mutandis \myoo-TAH-tis-myoo-TAHN-dis\	"adverb 1. With the necessary changes having been made. 2. With the respective differences having been considered. [Unlike most English terms with Latin parentage, ""mutatis mutandis"" (which translates literally as ""things having been changed that have to be changed"") maintains its Latinate aspect entirely. It doesn't look like an English phrase, which is perhaps why it remains rather uncommon despite having functioned in English since the 16th century. Although the phrase is used in the specialized fields of law, philosophy, and economics when analogous situations are discussed, it appears in other contexts, too, where analogy occurs, as this quote from Henry James' The American demonstrates: ""Roderick made an admirable bust of her at the beginning of the winter, and a dozen women came rushing to him to be done, mutatis mutandis, in the same style.""] ""The points that the author of the study makes about the town's roads and bridges also apply, mutatis mutandis, to its schools and municipal buildings."""
cockalorum \KOK-uh-lor-uhm, -LOAR-\	"noun A self-important little man. [From Middle English cock (rooster), of imitative origin. Earliest documented use: 1715.] Meantime, let him be foolish! ""I suppose he thinks he's the grand high cockalorum!"" she told herself, chuckling. - Margaret Wade Campbell Deland, The Iron Woman, 1911 His mother was dead and he could write about her: a young woman, a girl, really, with Sid, who was just a child, and Rose, who was even younger, emigrating from an inhospitable Russian countryside with that young cockalorum of a husband--good God, was he that way even then?--to live in this alien land and die before she was fifty. - Joseph Heller, Good as Gold, 1979"
golgotha \GOL-guh-thuh\	"noun 1. A place or occasion of great suffering. 2. A burial place. [After Golgotha, the hill near Jerusalem believed to be the site of Jesus's crucifixion. From Latin, from Greek golgotha, from Aramaic gulgulta, from Hebrew gulgolet (skull). The hill was perhaps named from the resemblance of its shape to a skull. Earliest documented use: 1597.] ""A soldier from Mississippi called Spotsylvania 'one vast Golgotha in immensity of the number of the dead'."" - Michael Ruane; 'Were Turned into Fiends and Brutes'; The Washington Post; Apr 27, 2014."
obtest \ob-TEST\	"verb tr. 1. To invoke as a witness. 2. To implore or beseech. verb intr. 3. To protest. 4. To plead. [From Latin obtestari (to implore, affirm, protest), from ob- (on, over), from testari (to bear witness or to make a will), from testis (witness). Ultimately from the Indo-European root trei- (three), which is also the source of three, sitar, trivia (from trivium, place where three roads meet), trivial, troika, trivet, testimony, testament, attest, testify (to be the third person: to bear witness), triskaidekaphobia (fear of the number 13), tercel (the male of a hawk), and trammel (restraint, shackle, net). Earliest documented use: 1548.] ""But I obtest, dear readers, I know nothing of any previous correspondence."" - Peter Hawes; Turakina Beach, Village of Thieves?; Manawatu Standard (New Zealand); Jul 8, 2008."
vituperate \vye-TOO-puh-rayt\	"verb Bitter and abusive language; condemnation. [""Vituperate"" has several close synonyms, including ""berate"" and ""revile."" ""Berate"" usually refers to scolding that is drawn out and abusive. ""Revile"" means to attack or criticize in a way prompted by anger or hatred. ""Vituperate"" adds to the meaning of ""revile"" by stressing an attack that is particularly violent in nature. It first appeared in English in the mid-16th century and can be traced back to two Latin words: the noun ""vitium,"" meaning ""fault,"" and the verb ""parare,"" meaning ""to make or prepare.""] ""In debate, Thaddeus Stevens vituperates with relish -- You fatuous nincompoop, you unnatural noise! -- at foes of the 13th amendment."" - Roy Blount; Mr. Lincoln Goes to Hollywood; Smithsonian (Washington, DC); Nov 2012."
micawber \mih-KAW-buhr\	"noun An eternal optimist. [After Wilkins Micawber, an incurable optimist in the novel David Copperfield (1850) by Charles Dickens. His schemes for making money never materialize, but he's always hopeful that ""something will turn up"". Earliest documented example of the word used allusively: 1852.] ""As the shadow work-and-pensions secretary, David Willetts, said yesterday, he takes the Mr Micawber approach to economics: something will turn up."" Larry Elliott; Mr Micawber May Find Result Misery; The Guardian (London, UK); Nov 4, 2004."
supposititious \suh-pah-zuh-TISH-us\	"adjective 1. a) Fraudulently substituted; spurious. b) Of a child (1) falsely presented as a genuine heir (2) illegitimate. 2. a) Imaginary b) Of the nature of or based on a supposition; hypothetic. [The Latin verb ""supponere,"" meaning ""substitute,"" has several legitimate heirs in English, including ""supposititious"" (which dates from the early 17th century) and ""supposition"" (a 15th century addition). The ""fraudulent"" and ""illegitimate"" meanings of ""supposititious"" trace back to ""supponere"" in a fairly direct route, whereas the ""imaginary"" and ""hypothetical"" meanings were influenced by the meanings of ""supposition."" In legal contexts, ""supposititious"" is primarily used in its earlier senses, as in ""a supposititious (fraudulent) will"" or ""the child was supposititious (illegitimate)."" When something hypothetical is being considered, the adjective ""suppositious"" is often preferred over ""supposititious.""] ""If I had Clark for a son, I would probably take my supposititious heir to lunch myself."""
chaffer \CHAFF-er\	"verb 1. To haggle; to bargain.2. British To exchange small talk; chatter. noun Bargaining or haggling. [In the 1200s, the noun ""chaffer"" was originally used in the sense of ""traffic"" or ""trade."" This noun (also then spelled ""chaffere,"" ""cheffere,"" and ""cheapfare"") was formed as a combination of ""chep,"" meaning ""trade"" or ""bargaining,"" and ""fare,"" meaning ""journey."" The verb ""chaffer"" appeared in the 1300s and originally meant ""to trade, buy, and sell."" Later, however, both the verb and the noun took on the senses referring to haggling and barter.] ""I chaffered with the king of those people, who was a wise and far-sighted woman, and brought her to understand that it would be much to her advantage to accept from me half the arms and ammunition I had brought with me."" - Delia Sherman; The Parwat Ruby; Fantasy & Science Fiction (Cornwall, Connecticut); Jun 1999."
adumbrate \a-DUM-brayt, AD-uhm-brayt\	"verb tr. 1. To foreshadow. 2. To give a rough outline or to disclose partially. 3. To overshadow or obscure. [From Latin umbra (shade, shadow), which also gave us the words umbrella, umbrage, and somber. Earliest documented use: 1599.] ""Mr Cameron should adumbrate painful decisions; he should sketch out the principles that will inform them; but he should not be drawn into spelling out what exactly they will be."" - Coming Clean; The Economist (London, UK); Mar 26, 2009. ""To create her three-dimensional composition, Robin Osler variedly manipulated floor and ceiling planes so as to adumbrate virtual spaces."" - Monica Geran; Shadow Play; Interior Design (New York); Apr 2000."
inure \in-YOOR, i-NOOR\	"verb tr. To accustom to something unpleasant. verb intr. 1. To become beneficial. 2. To take effect. [From the phrase in/en ure (in use, customary), from French oeuvre (work), from Latin opera, plural of opus (work). Ultimately from the Indo-European root op- (to work, produce) that is also the ancestor of words such as opera, opulent, optimum, operose, maneuver, and manure. Earliest documented use: 1489. The intransitive form of the word is usually used in legal contexts and also spelled as enure.] ""We were never able to tell our daughter that things would get better. No amount of repetition can inure you to these things."" - Aleksandar Hemon; The Aquarium; The New Yorker; Jun 13, 2011. ""'Jody Henderson voted on measures which he knew would inure to the special private gain of a business associate,' the commission stated."" - Tom McLaughlin; Trustee Will Likely be Fined for Voting Conflict; The Walton Sun (Santa Rosa Beach, Florida); May 27, 2011."
ravel \RAV-uhl\	"verb tr. intr. 1. To fray or to become disjoined; to untangle. 2. To entangle. [From Middle Dutch ravelen (to fray out), from ravel (loose thread). Earliest documented use: before 1540.] ""Ministries like the Gathering Place always run on a shoestring. In today's economic climate, the shoestring is raveling."" - Helen Colwell Adams; Band Aids Booked To Benefit Patients; Sunday News (Lancaster, Pennsylvania); Apr 12, 2009. ""W.B. Yeats's vision involved the notion that at any moment forces were raveling and unraveling, forming and disintegrating."" - Roger Cohen; The Arab Gyre; International Herald Tribune (Paris, France); Apr 26, 2011."
aceldama \uh-SEL-duh-muh\	"noun A place of bloodshed. [The term is derived from the name Aceldama, a potter's field described in the New Testament. It was purchased by the priests with the money Judas Iscariot received for betraying Jesus. From Greek Akeldama, from Aramaic haqeldema (field of blood). Earliest documented use: 1382.] ""Mickelsson describes Philosophy Department as a 'treacherous, ego-bloated, murder-stained hovel.' Ah, the groves of aceldama!"" - Margaret Manning; Book Review; Boston Globe; May 30, 1982."
babel \BAB-uhl, BAY-buhl\	"noun 1. A confused mixture of noises or voices. 2. A scene of noise or confusion. [From Hebrew Babhel (Babylon). In the Old Testament (Genesis 11:4-9), people united in an attempt to build a city with a tower that reached the heavens. This displeased god who halted the project by confounding people's speech so they wouldn't understand one another. Earliest documented use: before 1382.] ""While an excited babel of Spanish, German, Japanese, and Hindi emanated from the dozens of television news crews in the street, the response to Charles and Camilla's I dos among locals was mostly We Don't."""
wainwright \WAYN-ryt\	"noun One who builds or repairs wagons. [From Old English waen/waegen (wagon) + wryhta/wyrhta (worker). Earliest documented use: around 1000.] ""Macon engaged a wainwright to build one of the great wagons."""
calvary \KAL-vuh-ree\	"noun 1. A place or occasion of severe trial, anguish, or suffering. 2. A sculptured depiction of the crucifixion. [From Latin calvaria (skull), translation of Greek golgotha where Jesus Christ's crucifixion took place according to the New Testament. Earliest documented use: around 1000.] ""'Simply put, when someone is in a terminal phase, that means they are clinically condemned, that there is no solution and what they are facing is a calvary before dying,' Alfredo Perez Rubalcaba added."" - Spain to Pass Law to Allow Death 'With Dignity'; Agence France-Presse (Paris); Nov 19, 2010."
flivver \FLIV-er\	"noun A small cheap usually old automobile. [In 1908, Henry Ford changed the world with the Model T, the first affordable automobile. English speakers quickly coined an array of colorful terms for the Model T and the other relatively inexpensive cars that followed it. No one is sure why cheap cars came to be called ""flivvers,"" but we do know that in the early 1900s that colorful term was also used as a slang verb meaning ""to fail,"" as in ""If this film flivvers, I'll be in trouble."" In Flappers 2 Rappers: American Youth Slang, author Tom Dalzell lists ""flivver"" (which made its print debut in 1910, just two years after the Model T hit the streets) among a number of terms applied to ""the humble Ford."" Others included ""bone crusher,"" ""bouncing Betty,"" ""Henry's go-cart,"" ""puddle jumper,"" ""Spirit of Detroit,"" and ""Tin Lizzie.""] ""She shook my hand -- a man's strong grip -- and then drove away in her flivver."""
telos [tel-os, tee-los] plural teloi [tel-oi, tee-loi]	noun The end term of a goal-directed process; especially, the Aristotelian final cause. [Greek télos; compare tele-]
techne	"noun The rational method involved in producing an object or accomplishing a goal or objective. Techne resembles epistēmē in the implication of knowledge of principles, although techne differs in that its intent is making or doing, as opposed to ""disinterested understanding."""
Lammas \LAM-us\	"noun 1. August 1 originally celebrated in England as a harvest festival -- called also Lammas Day. 2. The time of the year around Lammas Day. [The word ""Lammas"" evolved from Old English ""hlafmaesse"" (""hlaf"" meaning ""loaf"" and ""maesse"" meaning ""mass""). It originated from the fact that on August first of each year, the early English church celebrated the harvesting of the first ripe grain by consecrating loaves made from it -- hence, ""loaf mass."" Shakespeareans will be sure to add that the eve of Lammas is Juliet's birthday, as her nurse tells us in Romeo and Juliet, ""Come Lammas Eve at night shall she be fourteen."" In addition, the phrase ""latter Lammas"" was used humorously to refer to a day that will never come, as in ""he will pay at latter Lammas.""] ""A traditional activity on Lammas is to craft corn dollies out of soaked, dried corn husks."""
collier \KOL-yuhr\	"noun 1. A coal miner. 2. A ship for carrying coal. [From Old English col (coal). Earliest documented use: before 1375.] ""Gunar turned to find a grimy-faced man, black as a collier."" - Lisa Hendrix; Immortal Champion; Berkley; 2011."
chamberlain \CHAYM-buhr-lin\	"noun 1. An official of a royal household who manages the living quarters. 2. A treasurer of a municipality or another public body. 3. A high-ranking official of a royal court. [Via French and Frankish, from Latin camera (chamber), from Greek kamara (vault) + -ling (a person/thing belonging to or concerned with). Earliest documented use: around 1225.] ""A chamberlain whose watchful gaze seems closer to that of a prison guard (or nanny), rattles off the royal schedule, which includes 'time for private thought'."" - Manohla Dargis; When Dusk Finally Settled on the Emperor; The New York Times; Nov 18, 2009."
voulu \voo-LOO\	"adjective Contrived; forced. [From French voulu, past participle of vouloir (to wish or want). Earliest documented use: 1909.] ""In real literature, as in real life, nothing much happens, and stirring up interest in paranormal phenomena is a rather voulu means of making life more interesting."" - Nicholas Lezard; Review: High on Giraffe Liver; The Guardian (London, UK); Jan 27, 2007."
pur sang \pyoor SAN*\ [* the last syllable is nasal]\	"adjective Pure; genuine. noun Someone or something that is genuine. adverb Genuinely; in all respects. [From French pur sang (pure blood). Earliest documented use: 1846.] ""The Durango is a pur sang truck wagon. There has been no namby-pamby dilution of its place in life."""
hircine \HUHR-syn, -sin\	"adjective 1. Of or relating to a goat. 2. Having a strong odor. 3. Lustful; lewd. [From Latin hircus (goat). Earliest documented use: 1656.] ""The showgirls, all looking to be in their early 20s, came out and posed next to the hircine and bearded Billy Gibbons and Dusty Hill, the guitarist and the bassist."""
coup de main \kood-uh-MAN*\ [* the last syllable is nasal]	"noun A surprise attack or sudden action. [From French, literally ""blow of the hand"" (as opposed to from the artillery). Earliest documented use: 1759.] ""This astonishing coup de main had results which were decisive on the development of the first day's fighting."""
bower \BOW-er\	"noun 1. An attractive dwelling or retreat. 2. A lady's private apartment in a medieval hall or castle. 3. A shelter made with tree boughs or vines twined together; arbor. [""Bower"" derives from Old English ""bur,"" meaning ""dwelling,"" and was originally used of attractive homes or retreats, especially rustic cottages. In the Middle Ages, ""bower"" came to refer to a lady's personal hideaway within a medieval castle or hall: her private apartment. Today's ""arbor"" sense combines the pastoral beauty of a rustic retreat with the privacy of a personal apartment. Although its tranquil modern meaning belies it, ""bower"" is distantly related to the far more roughshod ""bowery,"" which is the name of a district in New York City at one time known mostly for its flophouses and pawn shops. The Bowery got its name from a Dutch term for a dwelling or farm that shares a common ancestor with the terms that gave rise to ""bower.""] ""With its urban parks and backyard bowers, and its many varieties of flowering and hardwood trees, Memphis sometimes seems more forest than city."""
calenture \KAL-un-chur\	"noun A fever formerly supposed to affect sailors in the tropics. [In addition to being plagued by scurvy and homesickness, sailors of yore who dared the tropics also had calenture to worry about. Given a case of this fever they were likely to imagine that the sea was actually a green field and to leap into it. Our earliest evidence of the word in English is from the late 16th century. Such potent imagery destined the word for figurative use also, as in the Adam Bede quote above. ""Calenture"" has its origins in a Spanish word of the same meaning, ""calentura,"" which itself traces to Latin ""calere,"" meaning ""to be warm."" Other words from ""calere"" include ""calorie,"" ""cauldron,"" and ""scald.""] ""I always associate [the restaurant chain] Little Chef with rollicking rides along provincial arterial roads, the kind of interminable drives during which one begins to appreciate the delusion known as calenture. Sailors, in the days before steam and out of sight of land for months, would sometimes begin to hallucinate and, seeing the waves as green fields, try and walk off across them."""
predial \PREE-dee-ul\	"adjective Of or relating to land or its products. [""Predial"" is used for land matters; for example, there's ""predial tax"" (real estate tax) or ""predial larceny"" (stealing crops from the fields). The state of Louisiana employs ""predial"" in numerous sections of its Civil Code (and is distinguished from other states by its use of the word). The word derives from the Latin noun for ""landed property,"" ""praedium."" ""Praedium"" in turn is based on ""praed-,"" meaning ""bondsman"" -- that is, one who is legally liable for the debt of another.] ""Agrarian outbreaks, in many places, assumed the aspect of a predial war."" - Johnson Rossiter; The Great Events by Famous Historians; 1905."
paseo \pah-SAY-oh\	"noun 1. A leisurely stroll. 2. A place or path designed for walking. 3. A street or boulevard. [From Spanish pasear (to take a stroll), frequentative of pasar (to go, to pass), from Latin passus (step). Earliest documented use: 1832.] ""The idea was to turn the alleys into beachlike paseos to enchant pedestrians."""
prius \PRI-uhs, PRAI-\	"noun Something preceding, especially a necessary prior condition. [From Latin prius (something preceding). Earliest documented use: 1882.] ""This definition identifies God as the prius of everything that has being."""
impresa \im-PRAY-zuh\	"noun An emblem or device, usually with a motto. [From Italian impresa (undertaking), past participle of imprendere (to undertake), from Latin in- + prehendere (to grasp). Ultimately from the Indo-European root ghend-/ghed- (to seize or to take), which is also the source of pry, prey, spree, reprise, surprise, pregnant, osprey, prison, and get. Earliest documented use: before 1586.] ""A bottle of poison was brought by a girl who owns a ring bearing the impresa of Mary Stuart."""
corolla \kuh-ROL-uh\	"noun The petals of a flower as a group. From Latin corolla (little garland), diminutive of corona (wreath, crown, garland), from Greek korone (crown, anything curved). Ultimately from the Indo-European root sker- (to turn or bend), which is also the source of other words such as ranch, rank, shrink, circle, crisp, search, ring, curb, ridge, and curve. Earliest documented use: 1671.] ""'Some plants shelter their pollen grains through a change in floral orientation or closing their corolla on rainy days,' explains Shuang-Quan Huang."""
indite \in-DYTE\	"verb 1. Make up, compose. 2. To give literary or formal expression to. 3. To put down in writing. [""Indite"" looks like a misspelling of its homophone ""indict,"" meaning ""to charge with a crime,"" and that's no mere coincidence. Although the two verbs are distinct in current use, they are in fact related etymologically. ""Indite"" is the older of the two; it has been in the language since the 1300s. ""Indict,"" which came about as an alteration of ""indite,"" first appeared in English legal use around 1600. Ultimately, both terms come from the Latin ""indicere,"" meaning ""to make known formally"" or ""to proclaim,"" which in turn comes from ""in-"" plus ""dicere,"" meaning ""to say.""] ""The things he writes or I indite, we praise-- For poets, after all, are lonely men Singing a bit to themselves, but more to each other-- Hoping that fellow there will recognize A bit of himself in this pale groping brother."" Alfred Kreymborg; The Lost Sail: A Cape Cod Diary; Coward-McCann, Inc.; 1928. ""In 1844, Sir Charles Napier, governor of Sind, was writing from Kurrachee, as he spelled it, urging his officials to indite their papers in English, larded with as small a portion of to him unknown tongues as they conveniently can, instead of those he generally receives-namely Hindostanee larded with occasional words in English."" - A Plain Man's Appeal For Finds; The Economist (London); Nov 29, 1997."
talus \TAY-luhs\	"noun 1. A bone of the ankle joint, also known as the anklebone. 2. A slope, especially a sloping mass of debris at the foot of a cliff. [For 1: From Latin talus (ankle, anklebone, die for gaming). Earliest documented use: 1684. For 2: From French talus, from Old French talu (slope), from Latin talutium (slope). Earliest documented use: 1645.] ""Do you appreciate your feet? Have you thanked your metatarsals for their hard work? How about your talus?"" - Vince Pierri; Why it's Important to Appreciate Your Feet; Daily Herald (Arlington Heights, Illinois); Apr 4, 2008. ""John Laing then tumbled an additional 70 to 100 feet down a talus slope."" - Cory Hatch; Two Rescued After Accidents; Jackson Hole News & Guide (Wyoming); Jul 20, 2010."
parvenu \PAHR-vuh-noo, -nyoo\	"noun One who has newly acquired wealth or status, but has not yet gained acceptance by others in that class. [From French parvenu (upstart), from parvenir (to arrive), from Latin per- (through) + venire (to come). Earliest documented use: 1787.] ""To some, Charles Clore's philanthropy was seen as parvenu social climbing."" - Andrew Anthony; Vivien Duffield: The Woman Who Thinks It's Better to Give; The Observer (London, UK); Mar 27, 2011."
pelf \PELF\	"noun Wealth or riches, especially when dishonestly acquired. [In the 14th century, the Anglo-French word ""pelfre,"" meaning ""booty"" or ""stolen goods,"" was exchanged into English as ""pelf"" with the added meaning of ""property."" (""Pelfre"" is also an ancestor of the English verb ""pilfer,"" meaning ""to steal."") Two centuries later ""pelf"" showed gains when people began to use it for ""money"" and ""riches."" In some regions of Britain the word's use was diversified further, in a depreciative way, to refer to trash and good-for-nothings. The first of those meanings was a loss by about the mid-17th century; the second has little value outside of the Yorkshire region of England.] ""Despite those titles, power and pelf, The wretch, concentred all in self."" Sir Walter Scott, The Lay of the Last Minstrel."
contumacious \kahn-too-MAY-shus\	"adjective Stubbornly disobedient; rebellious. [Legal contexts are one area where you might encounter this fancy word for ""rebellious"" or ""insubordinate"" -- and the link between ""contumacious"" and the law goes back to Latin. The Latin adjective ""contumax"" means ""rebellious,"" or, in specific cases, ""showing contempt of court."" ""Contumacious"" is related to ""contumely,"" meaning ""harsh language or treatment arising from haughtiness and contempt."" Both ""contumacious"" and ""contumely"" are thought to ultimately come from the Latin verb ""tumere,"" meaning ""to swell"" or ""to be proud.""] ""Without the disciplining presence of the two heavyweights, contumacious councillors busied themselves with procedural obstruction and shouting 'corruption' at each other."" - Tehran's Municipal Politics; The Economist (London, UK); Jan 25, 2003."
megrim \MEE-grim\	"noun 1. (In plural, megrims) Low spirits. 2. Whim. 3. Migraine. [""Megrim"" and ""migraine"" share a meaning and an etymology. Latin and Greek speakers afflicted with a pain in one side of the head called their ailment ""hemicrania"" or ""hemikrania,"" from the Greek terms ""hemi-,"" meaning ""half,"" and ""kranion,"" meaning ""cranium."" French-speaking sufferers used ""migraine,"" a modification of ""hemicrania,"" for the same condition. English speakers borrowed ""migraine"" from French -- twice. First, they modified the French term to form ""migreime,"" which in turn gave rise to ""megrim"" in the 15th century. Later, in the 18th century, they returned to French and borrowed ""migraine"" again, this time retaining its French spelling. Nowadays, ""megrim"" and ""migraine"" can still be used interchangeably, but ""megrim"" has other meanings as well.] “Those who listen to this stuff get the megrims, the fantods, and loose bowels.” - Malcolm Berko; The Dow Jones at 23,000; Creators Syndicate (Los Angeles); Nov 11, 2015. “The family began moving from city to city on the whims and megrims of his father’s employer.” - Rohinton Mistry; Tales from Firozsha Baag; Penguin Books; 1987."
perpend \per-PEND\	"verb 1. To reflect on carefully; ponder. 2. To be attentive; reflect. [""Perpend"" isn't used often these days, but when it does show up it is frequently imperative, as in our second example. As such, its use can be compared to the phrase ""mark my words."" ""Perpend"" arrived in English in the 15th century from the Latin verb ""perpendere,"" which in turn comes from ""pendere,"" meaning ""to weigh."" Appropriately, our English word essentially means ""to weigh carefully in the mind."" ""Pendere"" has several descendants in English, including ""append,"" ""compendium,"" ""expend,"" and ""suspend."" ""Perpend"" can also be a noun meaning ""a brick or large stone reaching through a wall"" or ""a wall built of such stones,"" but that ""perpend"" comes from a Middle French source and is unrelated to the verb.] ""The man perpended, and when he replied did so after the style of the late and great Ollendorf."""
patristic \pə-ˈtris-tik\	adj Of or relating to the church fathers or their writings.
murrain \'mer-rain\	noun A pestilence or plague especially affecting domestic animals.
impute \'im-pyut\	"verb To attribute, ascribe, or credit, often unfairly. [From Old French imputer, from Latin imputare, from in- (in) + putare (to assess, reckon). Ultimately from the Indo-European root pau- (to cut, stroke, or stamp), which is also the source of amputate, compute, dispute, count, pavid, puerile, and catchpole. Earliest documented use: 1480.] ""'There's a tendency to impute much greater skill on the part of somebody like Jamie Dimon, who is very smooth,' Bill Miller says."" - Hugh Son; Bank of America Chief's Tumbles Turn Into Strides; The Washington Post; Mar 10, 2013."
haruspex \huh-RUSS-peks\	"noun A diviner in ancient Rome basing his predictions on inspection of the entrails of sacrificial animals. [""Haruspex"" was formed in Latin by the combination of ""haru-"" (which is akin to ""chorde,"" the Greek word for ""gut"") and ""-spex"" (from the verb ""specere,"" meaning ""to look""). Appropriately, ""haruspex"" can be roughly defined as ""one who looks at guts."" The ancient Romans had a number of ways of determining whether the gods approved of a particular course of action. Such divination was called ""augury,"" and a haruspex was a type of ""augur,"" an official diviner of ancient Rome. (Other augurs divined the will of the gods through slightly less gruesome means, such as observing the behavior of birds or tracking celestial phenomena.) ""Haruspex,"" like ""augur,"" has developed a general sense of ""one who prophesies,"" but this use is somewhat rare.] ""The haruspex declared that the outcome of the battle would be favorable."""
stridulate \STRIJ-uh-layt\	"verb To make a shrill creaking noise by rubbing together special bodily structures -- used especially of male insects (as crickets or grasshoppers). [""Stridulate"" is one member of a word family that has its ancestry in the Latin word ""stridulus,"" meaning ""shrill."" Also in this family is ""stridulation,"" a noun that can either refer to the shrill sound made when an insect stridulates or can simply mean ""the act of stridulating."" Another ""stridulus"" word is ""stridulatory,"" meaning ""able to stridulate"" or ""used in stridulation."" There's also ""stridulous,"" meaning ""making a shrill creaking sound."" ""Stridulus"" itself comes from ""stridere,"" which is the direct source of the last word we'll mention here. ""Stridor"" means ""a harsh, shrill, or creaking noise"" and also ""a harsh vibrating sound heard during respiration in cases of obstruction of the air passages.""] ""Water rushes and warbles over rocks, around our island in the middle of the stream. Insects stridulate in a hum almost electric."""
enchiridion \en-ky-RID-ee-uhn, -kih-\	"noun A handbook or a manual. [From Latin enchiridion, from Greek encheiridion, from en- (in) + cheir (hand) + -idion (diminutive suffix). Ultimately from the Indo-European root ghes- (hand) that also gave us cheiromancy (palmistry), chiral (not superimposable on its mirror image), and surgeon (literally, one who works with hands). Earliest documented use: 1541. In the beginning an enchiridion was a book concise enough to be carried in one's hand, as its origin from Greek cheir (hand) suggests. Both 'handbook' and 'manual' are literal equivalents of the word from English and Latin (from Latin manus: hand) respectively.] ""What to read: Toronto Life has been the enchiridion for Toronto's savvy since 1966."" - Alexander Besant; Canada's Capital of Cool; Times Union (Albany, New York); May 16, 2010."
parietal \puh-RY-i-tl\	"noun 1. Usually plural, regulations governing visiting privileges of the opposite sex in dormitories of a college campus. 2. A wall of a body part or cavity. adjective 1. Of or relating to campus regulations regarding dormitory visits. 2. Of or relating to the various walls in the body or related bones. [From Latin paries (wall).] ""A group of students at Simon's Rock, part of Bard College, is fighting the parietal rules against nonresident students' staying overnight in single-sex freshmen dormitories."""
bonny \bon-ee\	"adjective 1. a. (of people) Healthy, sweet, and lively. b. (of places) Placid; tranquil. c. Pleasing; agreeable; good. adverb British Dialect Pleasingly; agreeably; very well. ""A good heart will help you to a bonny face, my lad ... and a bad one will turn the bonniest into something worse than ugly."""
discrepant \dih-skrep-uhnt\	adjective (Usually of two or more objects, accounts, findings etc.) Differing; disagreeing; inconsistent: discrepant accounts.
recreant \REK-ree-uhnt\	"adjective 1. Unfaithful or disloyal to a belief, duty, or cause. 2. Craven or cowardly. noun 1. A faithless or disloyal person. 2. A coward. [Middle English, from Old French, present participle of recroire, to remember, from Medieval Latin recredere, to yield, pledge : Latin re-, re- + Latin credere, to believe.] ""Tyler, seeking a less imperial president and a stronger states' rights policy, joined a small group of Jacksonians who deserted the fold and eventually became known as southern states' rights Whigs. In 1836, the Jacksonian-controlled Virginia legislature demanded and secured the recreant's senatorial resignation."" - Tyler, John, The Reader's Companion to American History, 1 Jan 1991."
flocculent \ˈflä-kyə-lənt\	adjective 1. Resembling wool especially in loose fluffy organization. 2. Containing, consisting of, or occurring in the form of loosely aggregated particles or soft flakes <a flocculent precipitate>. [Latin floccus + English -ulent. First Known Use: 1800]
exscind \ek-ˈsind\	"transitive verb To cut off or out; excise. [From Latin exscindere, from ex- (out) + scindere (to cut). Ultimately from the Indo-European root skei- (to cut or split), which also gave us excise, schism, ski, shin, scienter, and adscititious. Earliest documented use: 1662.] ""The knife skipped off the stone and almost exscinded Shih Te's index finger."" - Alexander Goldstein; The Foundling; Trafford; 2009."
hypocritical	Affecting virtues or qualities one doesn't have.
gumption	"adjective Common sense, horse sense; enterprise, initiative. [English speakers have had gumption (the word, that is) since the early 1700s. The term's exact origins aren't known, but its earliest known uses are found in British and especially Scottish dialects (which also include the forms rumblegumption and rumgumption). In its earliest uses, gumption referred to intelligence or common sense, especially when those qualities were combined with high levels of energy. By the 1860s, American English speakers were also using gumption to imply ambition or tenacity, but it wasn't until the early 1900s that gumption began to appear in English texts as a direct synonym of courage or get-up-and-go.] ""Plans for the relocation and expansion of Vacaville's homeless shelter have hit a snag, but it looks like a little gumption and the city's support could keep the project from derailing."""
lummox \ˈlə-məks, -miks\	"noun A clumsy, stupid person. [Of uncertain origin, perhaps from East Anglian lummock (to move heavily or clumsily). Earliest documented use: before 1825.] ""Adam is harshly portrayed as an oaf, a nimrod, a village idiot, a lummox, a schlemiel -- you get the idea."" - Brad Wheeler; Humanizing Biblical Super Heroes; The Globe and Mail (Toronto, Canada); Apr 23, 2009."
numinous	"adjective Having a mysterious, holy, or spiritual quality. [Numinous is from the Latin word numen, meaning ""divine will"" or ""nod"" (it suggests a figurative nodding, of assent or of command, of the divine head). English speakers have been using numen for centuries with the meaning ""a spiritual force or influence."" We began using numinous in the mid-1600s, subsequently endowing it with several senses: ""supernatural"" or ""mysterious"" (as in ""possessed of a numinous energy force""), ""holy"" (as in ""the numinous atmosphere of the catacombs""), and ""appealing to the aesthetic sense"" (as in ""the numinous nuances of her art""). We also created the nouns numinousness and numinosity, although these are rare.] ""The Flinders [Australia] is an astonishingly evocative, numinous place: a landscape where the centuries, the millennia, the aeons all whisper to you."""
Tergiversation	"verb Evasion of straightforward action or clear-cut statement; equivocation. [The Latin ancestors of tergiversation (tergum, meaning ""back""; vertere, meaning ""to turn"") together translate roughly as ""to turn one's back."" Since the 16th century, tergiversation has described the reversal or desertion of a position or cause. Nowadays, it turns up in diplomatic or political discussions. As the late word maven William Safire explained of the related verb, tergiversate, in 2004, ""When engaged in by a politician you oppose, the verb tergiversate, pronounced with a soft g, is a choice favored by pedants, meaning 'to switch sides like an apostate.'""]"
insoluble	Not capable of being solved.
deleterious /del-i-TEER-ee-uhs/	"adjective Harmful; injurious. [From Greek deleterios (destructive), from deleisthai (to harm).] ""Petroleum and its products will continue to fetch escalating prices with new and deleterious effects on the world's economies and politics."" - Mary King; No Business as Usual in Energy; Trinidad and Tobago Express; Jun 25, 2007."
espouse	verb 1. To adopt or support a cause, idea, belief, etc. 2. To marry. [From Old French espouser, from Latin sponsare (to betroth), from sponsus (betrothed). Ultimately from the Indo-European root spend- (to make an offering or perform a rite), which is also the source of sponsor, spouse, respond, and riposte. Earliest documented use: 1477.] “Chevy Eugene’s research focuses on the arts as a key tool for Caribbean integration -- an idea he not only espouses, but actively pursues.” - Time for a New Kind of Black Activism; Toronto Star (Canada); Apr 19, 2015.
countenance (verb)	"verb tr. To tolerate or support. noun 1. Appearance, especially the facial expression. 2. The face. 3. Composure. 4. Approval or support. [From Old French contenance (bearing), from Latin continere (to contain), from con- (with) + tenere (to hold). Ultimately from the Indo-European root ten- (to stretch), which also gave us tense, tenet, tendon, tent, tenor, tender, pretend, extend, tenure, tetanus, hypotenuse, pertinacious, and detente. Earliest documented use: around 1290.] ""President Barack Obama said on Tuesday the United States 'will not countenance' Iran developing a nuclear weapon."" - Obama Seeks to Calm 'Drumbeat of War' Over Iran; The Buenos Aires Herald (Argentina); Mar 6, 2012. ""Thomas has long possessed a fierce countenance known to intimidate."" - Matt Calkins; NBA Veteran Journeyman Kurt Thomas; Columbian (Vancouver, Washington); Dec 13, 2011."
munificent	adjective 1. Very liberal in giving or bestowing; lavish. 2. Characterized by great liberality or generosity.
waspish	adjective 1. Resembling a wasp in behavior; especially, snappish, petulant. 2. Resembling a wasp in form; especially, slightly built.
novitiate	noun 1. The period or state of being a novice. 2. A house where novices are trained. 3. Novice.
proselyte	noun 1. A new convert (as to a faith or cause). related: proselytize - to induce someone to convert to one's faith, party or other cause.
abrade \ə-ˈbrād\	transitive verb 1. a) To rub or wear away especially by friction; erode. b) To irritate or roughen by rubbing. 2. To wear down in spirit; irritate, weary.
abnegate \ˈab-ni-ˌgāt\	"transitive verb 1. Deny, renounce. <abnegated their God> 2. Surrender, relinquish. <abnegated her powers> [There's no denying that the Latin root ""negare"" has given English some useful words. That verb, which means ""to deny,"" is the ultimate source of the noun ""abnegation,"" a synonym of ""denial"" that began appearing in English manuscripts in the 14th century. By the 17th century, people had concluded that if there was a noun ""abnegation,"" there ought to be a related verb ""abnegate,"" and so they created one by a process called ""back-formation"" (that's the process of trimming a suffix or prefix off a long word to make a shorter one). But ""abnegate"" and ""abnegation"" are not the only English offspring of ""negare."" That root is also an ancestor of other nay-saying terms such as ""deny,"" ""negate,"" and ""renegade.""] ""The mayor has ordered the city's finance control board to abnegate its powers."""
abash	transitive verb To destroy the self-confidence, poise, or self-possession of; disconcert; make ashamed or embarrassed: to abash someone by sneering.
tantamount \ˈtan-tə-ˌmau̇nt\	adjective Equivalent in value, significance, or effect. <a relationship tantamount to marriage>
palliate	"verb 1. To ease the symptoms of a problem without fixing its cause. 2. To make an offense appear less severe by excuses or apologies; extenuate. [From Latin palliare (to cover), from pallium (cloak).] ""When success came it palliated his sense of loss for a while."" - Frank Carrigan; John Lennon: The Life; Brisbane Times (Australia); Jan 9, 2009."
raillery \ˈrā-lə-rē\	1. Good-natured ridicule; banter. 2. Jest.
simper	verb To smile in a silly manner. noun A silly smile.
inimical \i-ˈni-mi-kəl\	"adjective Hostile. [From Latin in- (not) + amicus (friend). A few other words that share the same root are: amigo, amity, enemy, amicable, and amicus curiae. Earliest documented use: 1645.] ""But the landers found no other signs of biological activity, nor any organic compounds. If anything, the soil seemed inimical to life."" - Burkhard Bilger; The Martian Chroniclers; The New Yorker; Apr 22, 2013."
fey \ˈfā\	"adjective 1. Strange; unconventional; otherworldly. 2. Doomed. 3. Able to see the future. [""Fey"" is a word that defies its own meaning, since it has yet to even come close to the brink of death after being in our language for well over 800 years. In Old and Middle English it meant ""feeble"" or ""sickly."" Those meanings turned out to be fey themselves, but the word lived on in senses related to death, and because a wild or elated state of mind was once believed to portend death, other senses arose from these. The word ""fay,"" meaning ""fairy"" or ""elf"" may also have had an influence on some senses of ""fey."" Not until the late 20th century did the word's most recent meanings, ""precious"" and "" campy,"" find their way onto the pages of the dictionary. From Old English faege (fated to die). Earliest documented use: before the twelfth century.] ""At times, the book The Patron Saint of Eels seems a little fey; perhaps the made-up miracle makes its moral point a little too easily."" Lisa Gorton; The Patron Saint of Eels; The Age (Melbourne, Australia); Apr 16, 2005."
forfend	transitive verb 1. To ward of. 2. Protect, preserve.
moiety \MOY-uh-tee\	"noun A half. [""Moiety"" is one of thousands of words that English speakers borrowed from French. The Anglo-French ""moite"" (meaning ""a half"" or ""part of something"") comes from Late Latin ""medietat-,"" meaning ""half."" Around the same time that ""moiety"" was borrowed from Anglo-French, ""medietat-"" was also borrowed directly from Latin as ""mediety,"" a word which can also mean ""a half."" ""Medietat-"" comes from Latin ""medius"" (meaning ""middle""), which has contributed to such English words as ""medium,"" ""meridian,"" and ""milieu.""] ""She was asked to describe the tribe's two moieties. She said the Winter and Summer People provided the basic religious and social structure...."""
roman-fleuve \roe-MAAN*-fluhv\ [* the middle syllable is nasal]	"noun A long novel, often in several volumes, that tells the story of an individual, family, or society across several generations. [From French roman (novel) + fleuve (river). Earliest documented use: 1936. Plural romans-fleuves.] ""And it'd be a shame to miss out on the delights of the roman-fleuve as summer reading: there's a thrill in buying 12 volumes to read end-to-end."" - Tim Martin; I'll be Joining the Dance Online; The Daily Telegraph (London, UK); May 17, 2008."
chapbook \CHAP-book\	"noun A small book or pamphlet containing stories, poems, or religious tracts. [From chapman book, a small, cheap book sold by a chapman or a colporteur. Earliest documented use: 1824.] ""Gloucester writer and editor David Rich will read from and discuss his new chapbook of poems."" - Ann Gail McCarthy; Rocky Neck Tradition Kicks Off Busy Weekend; Gloucester Times (Massachusetts); Aug 10, 2011."
quisling \KWIZ-ling\	"noun A traitor, especially one who aids an invading enemy. [After Major Vidkun Quisling (1887-V1945), Norwegian army officer who collaborated (1940-1945) with the German occupying forces during World War II and ruled Norway as head of the puppet government. He was shot for treason after the German defeat. Earliest documented use: 1940. Benedict Arnold was another army officer whose name has turned into an eponym as a synonym for a traitor.] ""Zoran Djindjic will be remembered as a quisling who enriched himself by selling his country to those who had waged war against it."" - Neil Clark; The Quisling of Belgrade; The Guardian (London, UK); Mar 13, 2003."
schlemiel or schlemihl or shlemiel \shluh-MEEL\	"noun An inept, clumsy person: a habitual bungler. [From Yiddish shlemil, from Hebrew Shelumiel, a Biblical and Talmudic figure who met an unhappy end, according to the Talmud. Earliest documented use: 1892. No discussion of schlemiel would be complete without mentioning schlimazel, one prone to having bad luck. In a restaurant, a schlemiel is the waiter who spills soup, and a schlimazel is the diner on whom it lands.] ""Warren is an endearing schlemiel who is all awkward gestures, inexpressive shrugs, and with a physical clumsiness."" - Set Misses Mark But Cast's Touch is Sure; Dominion Post (Wellington, New Zealand); Mar 3, 2008."
corrade \kuh-RAYD\	"verb To wear or crumble away through abrasion. [In Latin ""rodere"" means ""to gnaw"" and ""radere"" means ""to scrape."" The latter word is at the base of both ""abrade"" and ""corrade."" ""Corrade,"" which carved its niche in the English language during the mid-17th century, is used when something, such as moving water, ""rubs"" or ""scrapes"" something else away. In contrast, the word ""corrode,"" derived from ""rodere,"" is fitting when something ""eats away"" at something else especially by chemical action. ""Erode"" shares that meaning but can also be used to describe abrasive action, much like ""corrade."" As an aside, the gnawing of small animals, such as mice and squirrels, influenced the formation of the noun ""rodent"" through ""rodere.""] ""The nearly pyramidal shapes in the Cydonia region of Mars -- which recent imagery suggest are likely no more than ancient mountains corraded by eons of sandstorms -- were advanced by the late astronomer Carl Sagan and others as sites to be examined by future missions to Mars as potential artifacts of intelligence."""
retrodiction \ret-roh-DIK-shuhn\	"noun Using present information to make an assertion about the past; an instance of such an assertion. [From Latin retro- (back) + dicere (to say). Ultimately from the Indo-European root deik- (to show, to pronounce solemnly), which is also the source of judge, verdict, vendetta, revenge, indicate, dictate, and paradigm. Earliest documented use: 1895.] ""Dan Gardner, for all his concern about prediction, has no qualms about retrodiction, even of the distant, unknowable past."" - Kathryn Schulz; What Lies Ahead?; The New York Times; Mar 27, 2011. ""Turning to comets, F. Richard Stephenson matches modern retrodiction against Babylonian and Chinese records to conclude that we have been sighting Halley's comet on each of its returns since 240 BCE."" - Michael S. Mahoney; Standing on the Shoulders of Giants; Science (Washington, DC); May 17, 1991."
anosognosia \uh-no-sog-NOH-zee-uh\	"noun Unawareness of one's disease, disability, or a defect. [From Greek a- (without) + nosos (disease) + gnosis (knowledge). Earliest documented use: 1915. Also see agnosia.] ""When I weigh up how much we have achieved in 50 years in spite of our collective anosognosia, the thought of what we could have achieved, had we displayed an ounce of sanity, is enough to drive me nuts."""
requisition \rek-wuh-ZISH-uhn\	noun 1. The act of requiring or demanding. 2. A demand made. verb (used with object) To require or take for use; press into service; to demand.
widdershins \WID-er-shinz\	"adverb In a left-handed, wrong, or contrary direction: counterclockwise. [Legend holds that demons always approached the devil widdershins. Not surprisingly, such a path was considered evil and unlucky. By the mid-1500s, English speakers had adopted ""widdershins,"" (from the Old High German ""widar,"" meaning ""back"" or ""against,"" and ""sinnen,"" meaning ""to travel"") for anything following a path opposite to the direction the sun travels across the sky (that is, counterclockwise). But in its earliest known uses ""widdershins"" was far less malignant; it was used simply to describe a case of bad hair in which unruly locks stood on end or fell the wrong way.] ""We turned right out of the gates and walked the exterior perimeter of the gardens slowly before turning around and walking it again widdershins."""
picaresque \pik-uh-RESK\	"adjective Of or relating to rogues or scoundrels. [""Picaresque"" derives from Spanish ""picaresco,"" which means ""of or relating to a picaro."" The word ""picaro,"" which also derives from Spanish, means ""rogue"" or ""bohemian."" ""Picaro"" describes a type of character that has long been a popular subject for fictional narrative. Typically, the picaresque novel centers around a wandering individual of low standing who happens into a series of adventures among people of various higher classes, often relying on wits and a little dishonesty to get by. The first known novel in this style is Lazarillo de Tormes (circa 1554), an irreverent work about a poor boy who works for a series of masters of dubious character. The novel has been attributed to Diego Hurtado de Mendoza, but his authorship is disputable.] ""The Russian film Silent Souls was a picaresque tale about a newly widowed man and his friend taking the body of his dead wife on a road trip of thousands of miles to say goodbye to her according to the rituals of the ancient Merja culture."""
keening \KEE-ning\	"noun A wailing lament for the dead. [From Irish caoineadh (lament). Earliest documented use: 1876.] ""Of all the closures of independent stores that have left hundreds of British high streets a book-free wilderness, none has given rise to more celebrity keening than the imminent demise of The Travel Bookshop."" - Boyd Tonkin; Crimes Behind Closed Doors; The Independent (London, UK); Sep 9, 2011."
malefaction \mal-uh-FAK-shuhn\	noun An evil deed; crime; wrongdoing.
sop \SAHP\	"noun A conciliatory or propitiatory bribe, gift, or gesture. [The etymology of ""sop"" takes us from bread to hellhounds to bribery. The journey starts over 900 years ago, when ""sop"" first referred to bread soaked in water, wine, or another liquid. Such soggy bread was considered a treat sure to tempt any appetite. Sops were considered so appealing that English translations of Virgil's Aeneid tell of a sibyl using one soaked in honey to distract and drug Cerberus, the three-headed watchdog of the gates of the underworld, so Aeneas could get by him safely. By the 1600s, that mythological use of ""sop"" had given rise to the expression ""give a sop to Cerberus,"" meaning ""to bribe"" and to using ""sop"" to refer to a bribe or conciliatory gift.] ""The contractor offered higher priced bathroom fixtures at no extra cost as a sop to the homeowner, who was threatening to cancel the contract."""
bumbershoot \BUM-ber-shoot\	"noun Umbrella. [Umbrellas have plenty of nicknames. In Britain, ""brolly"" is a popular alternative to the more staid ""umbrella."" Sarah Gamp, a fictional nurse who toted a particularly large umbrella in Charles Dickens's novel Martin Chuzzlewit, has inspired some English speakers to dub oversize versions ""gamps."" ""Bumbershoot"" is a predominantly American nickname, one that has been recorded as a whimsical, slightly irreverent handle for umbrellas since the late 1890s. As with most slang terms, the origins of ""bumbershoot"" are a bit foggy, but it appears that the ""bumber"" is a modification of the ""umbr-"" in ""umbrella"" and the ""shoot"" is an alteration of the ""-chute"" in ""parachute"" (since an open parachute looks a little like an umbrella).] ""Noticing that a light rain had just begun to fall, Grandpa turned to Susie and said, 'Don't forget to take your bumbershoot!'"""
pediculous \pih-DIK-yuh-lus\	"adjective Infested with lice: lousy; contemptible. [Count on the English language's Latin lexical options to pretty up the unpleasant. You can have an entire conversation about lice and avoid the l-word entirely using ""pediculous"" and its relatives. None of the words (from ""pediculus,"" meaning ""louse"") is remotely common -- most of them are so uncommon that they appear only in our Unabridged dictionary -- but they're all available to you should you feel the need for them. There's ""pediculosis,"" meaning ""infestation with lice""; ""pedicular,"" meaning ""of or relating to lice""; and ""pediculoid,"" meaning ""resembling or related to the common lice."" ""Pediculid"" names a particular kind of louse -- one of the family Pediculidae. And if you'd like to put an end to all of this you might require a ""pediculicide"" -- defined as ""an agent for destroying lice.""] ""We prisoners called ourselves the Jerseys, not out of respect for this vile, pediculous hulk, but because it was our commonality, the glue that held us in its glorious stink."" - Jerome Charyn; Johnny One-Eye; Norton; 2008. ""Harris called one of the pair a 'slimy, contemptible oaf ... ignorant pediculous loafer ... untalented, worthless, parasitical bloodsucker."" - Jim Seavor; Our Town Controversial? Providence Journal (Rhode Island); Oct 5, 1985."
dogsbody \DOGZ-bod-ee\	"noun A menial worker; drudge. [In the British navy, dogsbody was the term sailors used for the unpalatable food given to them, boiled peas (officially known as pease pudding) and biscuits soaked in water. With time the term began to be applied to low-ranked sailors and eventually to anyone who is forced to do menial jobs that no one else wants to do. Why a dog? Probably from the general poor reputation of a dog, as evident in terms such as a dog's life and a dog's chance. Earliest documented use: 1818.] ""The US has been accused of treating Britain not as a partner but as a dogsbody."" - Nick Amies; Obama Visits Britain; Deutsche Welle (Bonn, Germany); May 24, 2011."
deontology \dee-on-TOL-uh-jee\	noun Ethics, especially that branch dealing with duty, moral obligation, and right action.
flannelmouth \FLAN-uhl-mouth\	"noun A smooth-talker, a flatterer, or a braggart. [Besides the fabric, the word flannel can refer to a washcloth, an undergarment, or trousers, but here we are interested in its metaphorical sense which apparently developed from the soft and smooth texture of the fabric. The origin of the word flannel remains fuzzy. Two possible derivations have been suggested: from Welsh gwlanen (woolen article) or from Old French flaine (a kind of coarse wool, blanket). Earliest documented use: 1882.] ""Democrats are a lot more entertaining, but they suffer from a terminal case of flannelmouth. At the conventions last summer, the partying Republicans in San Diego did everything they could to keep the press away from their fun. By contrast, the Democrats in Chicago were dragging reporters in for drinks."" - Nicholas Von Hoffman; Republicans Are From Mars Democrats Are From Venus; Life Magazine; Nov 1996."
sublimate \SUB-luh-mayt\	"verb 1. To cause to pass directly from the solid to the vapor state. 2. To direct the expression of (a desire or impulse) from a primitive to a more socially and culturally acceptable form. [To sublimate is to change the form, but not the essence. Physically speaking, it means to transform solid to vapor; psychologically, it means changing the outlet, or means, of expression from something base and inappropriate to something more positive or acceptable. The word ""sublimate"" comes from the Latin verb ""sublimare,"" which means ""to lift up"" or ""raise"" and which is also the ancestor of our ""sublime."" ""Sublimate"" itself once meant ""to elevate to a place of dignity or honor"" or ""to give a more elevated character to,"" but these meanings are now obsolete.] ""Jeb's letter made Marcy want to scream and throw things, but instead she sublimated her anger by writing a tart reply."""
apopemptic \ap-uh-PEMP-tik\	"adjective Relating to departing or leave-taking; valedictory. [From Greek apopempein (to send off, to dismiss), from apo- (away) + pempein (to send). Earliest documented use: 1753.] ""It had not been billed as a farewell dinner, and Mr. Kemp hardly was there to deliver an apopemptic address."" - William F. Buckley; On Saying Goodbye to Jack Kemp; The Dallas Morning News (Texas); Dec 8, 1988."
forficate \FOR-fi-kit, kayt\	"adjective Deeply forked. [From Latin forfex (scissors). Earliest documented use: 1816.] ""Now comes a heat from your forficate thighs."" - Alexander Trocchi, ed.; Merlin; 1952."
lout \laut\	noun An awkward, brutish person. intransitive verb 1. To bow in respect 2. Submit, yield. transitive verb To treat as a lout; scorn.
mulish \MYU-lish\	adjective Unreasonably and inflexibly obstinate.
prig \prig\	noun 1. Thief. 2. One who offends or irritates by observance of proprieties (as of speech or manners) in a pointed manner or to an obnoxious degree.
addlepated \AD-l-pay-tid\	"adjective Confused; eccentric; flustered. [From addle (to muddle or confuse), from adel (rotten) + pate (head). Earliest documented use: 1614.] ""Addlepated inventor Wallace and his intelligent canine companion Gromit take up a new career as bakers in 'A Matter of Loaf and Death'."""
supplicate \suhp-li-keyt\	"verb To pray humbly; make humble and earnest entreaty or petition. [From Latin supplicare (to kneel). Ultimately from the Indo-European root plak- (to be flat) that's also the source of fluke, flake, flaw, plead, please, and supple.] ""The supplicatory attitude that some Taiwanese politicians have shown to China to win its favor must stop."""
auto-da-fé \aw-toh-duh-f-EY\	noun The public declaration of the judgment passed on persons tried in the courts of the the Spanish Inquisition, followed by the execution by the civil authorities of the sentences imposed, especially the burning of condemned heretics at the stake. [Portuguese: act of the faith]
catawampus \kat-uh-WOM-puhs\	"adjective 1. Askew; crooked. 2. Diagonally positioned: catercornered. [From cater (diagonally), from French word quatre (four). Ultimately from the Indo-European root kwetwer- (four), which also gave us four, square, cadre, quadrant, quarantine (literally, period of forty days). Earliest documented use: 1840. The word is also spelled as cattywampus.] ""Have you noticed that life seems a bit catawampus lately?"""
ziggurat \ZIG-uh-rat\	"noun An ancient Mesopotamian temple tower consisting of a lofty pyramidal structure built in successive stages with outside staircases and a shrine at the top; also, a structure or object of similar form. [French professor of archaeology Francois Lenormant spent a great deal of time poring over ancient Assyrian texts. In those cuneiform inscriptions, he recognized a new language, now known as Akkadian, which proved valuable to the understanding of a civilization that goes back 5,000 years. Through his studies, he became familiar with the Akkadian word for the towering Assyrian temples: ""ziqqurratu."" In 1877 he came out with Chaldean Magic, a scholarly exposition on the mythology of the Chaldeans, a people who lived 2700 years ago in what is now modern-day Iraq. In his work, which was immediately translated into English, he introduced the word ""ziggurat"" to the modern world in his description of the ziggurat of the palace of Khorsabad.]"
scrobiculate \skroh-BIK-yuh-layt\	"adjective Having many small grooves; furrowed. [From Latin scrobiculus (small planting hole), diminutive of scrobis (trench). Ultimately from the Indo-European root sker- (to cut), which is also the source of skirt, curt, screw, shard, shears, carnage, carnivorous, carnation, sharp, and scrape. Earliest documented use: 1806.] ""The stalk is scrobiculate and at first slightly sticky."" - Alexander Smith and Nancy Weber; The Mushroom Hunter's Field Guide; University of Michigan Press; 1980."
tramontane \truh-MAHN-tayn\	"adjective 1. Situated on the north side of the Alps; transalpine. 2. Lying on or coming from the other side of a mountain range. [The journey of ""tramontane"" into English starts in Latin and begins with the coming together of the prefix ""trans-,"" meaning ""across"" or ""beyond,"" and ""montanus,"" meaning ""of a mountain."" When the word entered Italian, it did so as ""tramontano"" and referred to people or things on or from the other side of a mountain range -- specifically, the Alps. ""Tramontano"" then traveled into English during the late 16th century as both the adjective ""tramontane,"" with the same meaning as the Italian word, and as the noun ""tramontane,"" meaning ""one dwelling in a tramontane region"" or ""a foreigner."" During the 18th century, the adjective began carrying the meaning ""barbarous,"" but that meaning is now rarely -- if ever -- used.] ""He kept a journal on his journey to the tramontane region of the country."""
chaparral \shap-uh-RAL, chap-\	"noun A dense, often impenetrable, growth of shrubs and thorny bushes. [From Spanish chaparral, from chaparro (dwarf evergreen oak), from Basque txapar (thicket).] ""Satwiwa Loop Trail: an easy 1.5- mile stroll through grasslands and chaparral."" - Rancho Sierra Vista/Satwiwa; Ventura County Star (Ventura, California); Dec 31, 2004. ""But most of the images I'd shot were nothing but blue sky and some out-of-focus chaparral."" - Chris Welsch; Point and Shoot; Star Tribune (Minneapolis, Minnesota); Dec 26, 2004."
cacique \kuh-SEEK\	"noun A local political boss. [Via Spanish from Taino cacike (chief). Earliest documented use: 1555. Taino is an extinct member of the Arawakan language family spoken in the West Indies.] ""About a month after Mayor Daley announced his retirement, many aldermen are still too stunned to know how to function without being bossed. 'Not being told what to do by the cacique is new to a lot of people,' Mr. Munoz said."" - Dan Mihalopoulos; Daley's Tenure Nears End; The New York Times; Oct 8, 2010."
kine \kyn\	"noun A plural of cow. [From Middle English kyn, from Old English cyna, a plural of cu (cow). Earliest documented use: 1800. Kine is perhaps the only word in English that has no letters in common with its singular form, cow. Other words that are pluralized using -n marker are children, brethren, and oxen.] ""Cows stood belly deep in a ranch pond, doing their impersonation of the kine in John Constable's paintings."" - Verlyn Klinkenborg; Water and Grasses; The New York Times; Jul 5, 2010."
yob \yob\	"noun A rude, rowdy youth. [Coined by reversing the spelling of the word boy. Earliest documented use: 1859. There are not a lot of words in the English language that are coined from the backward spelling of another word. Another example is mho, the unit of electrical conductance, coined by reversing ohm, the unit of resistance. Fiction writers sometimes come up with names for their characters by spelling another name or word backwards.] ""Like a yob who starts a fight in a pub by saying you have spilled his pint, the Russians offered pretexts that both parties knew were ludicrous."" - A.D. Miller; A First-Hand Account of Life in Modern Russia; The Guardian (London, UK); Oct 21, 2011."
splenetic \splih-NET-ik\	"adjective Marked by bad temper, malevolence, or spite. [In early Western physiology, a person's physical qualities and mental disposition were believed to be determined by the proportion of four bodily humors: blood, phlegm, yellow bile, and black bile. The last of these was believed to be secreted by the spleen, causing feelings of disposition ranging from intense sadness (melancholia) to irascibility. This now-discredited association explains how the use of ""splenetic"" (deriving from the Late Latin ""spleneticus"" and the Latin ""splen,"" meaning ""spleen"") came to mean both ""bad-tempered"" and ""given to melancholy"" as well as ""of or relating to the spleen."" In later years, the ""melancholy"" sense fell out of use, but the sense pertaining to ill humor or malevolence remains with us today.] ""I know David was in a bad mood all day, but the splenetic tone of his reply to Brenda's question was not necessary."""
mantissa \man-TIS-uh\	"noun 1. An addition of little importance. 2. The decimal part of a logarithm or the positive fractional part of a number. [Via Latin mantisa/mantissa (makeweight, something put in a scale to complete a needed weight), from a now extinct language, Etruscan, once spoken in what is now Tuscany, Italy. Earliest documented use: 1641.] ""Are we supposed to think that most criticism of Mr. John Fowles is a mantissa?"""
dragoman \DRAG-uh-man\	"noun An interpreter or guide. [From French dragoman, from Italian dragomanno, from Latin/Greek dragoumanos, from Arabic tarjuman, and Aramaic, from Akkadian targumanu (interpreter). Earliest documented use: 1300s. Akkadian is a now-extinct Semitic language once spoken in ancient Mesopotamia (now Iraq) and written in cuneiform. Earliest documented use: 14th century.] ""The pig doesn't express himself in some exotic swine-dialect, the farmer has no need to summon a dragoman fluent in grunts, each understands the other perfectly."" - Eric Ormsby; Ambitious Diminutives; Parnassus: Poetry in Review; 2008."
potboiler \pot-boi-ler\	noun A mediocre work of literature or art produced merely for financial gain.
equable \EK-wuh-buhl, EE-kwuh-\	"adjective 1. Not easily upset; tranquil. 2. Uniform; steady. 3. Free from extremes. [From Latin aequus (even, equal). Earliest documented use: before 1676.] ""It takes a lot to disturb the equable temperament of Celtic goalkeeper Jonathan Gould."" - Ian Paul; Enforced Rest Has Left Gould Seething; The Herald (Glasgow, Scotland); Sep 29, 1999. ""What was, until quite recently, predictable, temperate, mild, and equable British weather, now sees the seasons reversed and temperature and rainfall records broken almost every year."" - John Vidal; Extreme Weather Ahead; The Guardian (London, UK); Jun 14, 2011."
fascicle \FASS-ih-kul\	"noun 1. A small or slender bundle (as of pine needles or nerve fibers). 2. One of the divisions of a book published in parts. [""Fascicle,"" which has been a part of our language since the 15th century, is one of a bundle of words derived from Latin ""fascis,"" meaning ""bundle."" In book publishing, ""fascicle"" and its variants ""fascicule"" and ""fasciculus"" can all be used for one of the installments of a voluminous work; ""fasciculus"" can also be used for a bundle of anatomical fibers. ""Fasciitis"" is an inflammation of a ""fascia,"" which is a sheet of tissue connecting muscles. You can also have a case of ""fasciculation,"" or muscular twitching. Other descendants of ""fascis"" include ""fasces"" (a bundle of rods and an ax borne before ancient Roman magistrates as a badge of authority) and ""fascine"" (a long bundle of sticks of wood bound together).] ""It was a word that was due to be included in the dictionary's second fascicle, or part, being readied to be printed and published in the later summer of 1885."""
terrene \teh-REEN, TER-een\	"adjective Relating to the earth; earthly; worldly; mundane. [From Latin terra (earth). Ultimately from the Indo-European root ters- (to dry), which is also the source of territory, terrace, turmeric, and toast. Earliest documented use: 1300s.] ""It was just a twitch of the earth, a routine shudder, one of many such minor terrene adjustments recorded in a millennium."" - Jerry Carroll; Fifteen Seconds Seemed Like Forever; The San Francisco Chronicle; Oct 17, 1990."
baldachin \BAL-duh-kin, BOL-\ Also, baldacchino, baldachino \bal-duh-KEE-noh\	"noun 1. A rich embroidered fabric of silk and gold. 2. A canopy. [English baldachin is derived from Italian baldacchino which is from Baldacco, the Italian name for Baghdad. The city was once known for this fabric and earlier canopies were made of it. Earliest documented use: 1598.] ""A rabbi married the couple a few weeks later, under a baldachin made of four brooms and an old blanket."" - Henryk M. Broder; Holocaust Survivor Becomes YouTube Star; Der Spiegel (Germany); Aug 12, 2010."
naches \NAKH-es\	"noun Emotional gratification or pride, especially taken vicariously at the achievement of one's children. [From Yiddish (nakhes), from Hebrew nakhat (contentment). Earliest documented use: 1929. Also see kvell.] ""So while I love living in this adopted country of mine, I will never get the naches from shopping here that I do in America."" - Ann Kleinberg; Confessions of a Mad Shopper; The Jerusalem Post (Israel); Sep 5, 2003."
callipygous \kal-uh-PY-guhs\	"adjective Having well-shaped buttocks. [From Greek calli- (beautiful) + pyge (buttocks). Earliest documented use: 1923. Another form of this word is callipygian. Two related words are dasypygal and steatopygia.] ""The boys knew that if they could remember the details of their school work only half as vividly as they recalled every detail of the callipygous Kathy, they would all be eligible for full college scholarships."" - John H. Steinemann; Handstand; Askmar; 2010. ""'Pick me,' Aphrodite says, arching her back and turning slightly to present to him under her robe a callipygous formation more perfect than ever he has seen."" - Joseph Heller; Portrait of an Artist, as an Old Man; Simon & Schuster; 2000."
kegler \KEG-ler\	"noun A person who bowls. [Some historians trace the game of bowling back to the Stone Age (that information may conjure up images of Fred Flintstone on the lanes), but it was a medieval version of the game that gave us the word ""kegler."" In medieval Germany, the game was practiced as a test of religious faith and purity. The ""Kegel"" (bowling pin) represented a heathen, and those who could topple it with a round stone proved that they were free of sin. ""Kegel"" gave English the nouns ""kegling"" (meaning ""bowling"") and ""kegler,"" by way of the German verb ""kegeln"" (""to bowl""). Nowadays, both words tend to be used humorously by writers referring to the modern game.] ""Kegler alert: For all other bowlers (keglers in bowling lingo), the grand opening of the 24-lane, smoke-free complex is today."""
sumptuary \SUMP-choo-er-ee\	"adjective 1. Relating to or regulating expenses. 2. Regulating personal habits or behavior on moral or religious grounds. [From Latin sumptuarius, from sumptus expense, past participle of sumere (to take up), from emere (to take). Ultimately from Indo-European root em- (to take or distribute) that is also the source of words such as example, sample, assume, consume, prompt, ransom, vintage, and redeem.] ""The monthly Sumptuary Allowance for both the Speaker and the Deputy Speaker has been raised to Tk 6,000 from Tk 5,000 and Tk 3,000."" - Remunerations of PM, Speaker, Ministers Up; The Independent (Bangladesh); Jul 8, 2003. [Tk is the abbreviation for Taka, the principal unit of currency in Bangladesh.] ""A ban on advertising of junk foods in schools, especially candies and soft drinks with high sugar content. Sumptuary taxes on soft drinks as well - sure to be opposed bitterly by the lobbyists. If alcohol and tobacco advertisements cannot be allowed on children's TV, why allow advertising of foods that promote obesity and future health ills on a par with them?"" - Ian Williams; Big Food's Real Appetites; The Nation (New York); May 6, 2002."
trenchant \TREN-chuhnt\	adjective 1. Incisive or keen, as language or a person; caustic; cutting: trenchant wit. 2.Vigorous; effective; energetic: a trenchant policy of political reform. 3. Clearly or sharply defined; clear-cut; distinct.
platyrrhine \PLAT-i-ryn, -rin\	"adjective Having a broad, flat nose. [From Greek platy- (flat) + rhin (nose). Earliest documented use: 1842. New World monkeys, known for broad, flat noses and prehensile tails are called Platyrrhini.] ""Again that terse, crisp sound lashed the clear air and one nostril of her platyrrhine nose became a bloody pockmark. She ceased to move."""
lissotrichous \li-SO-tri-kuhs\	"adjective Having straight or smooth hair. [The origin of this word isn't hairy at all. It's pretty straightforward -- the word is from Greek lissos (smooth) and thrix (hair). Some cousins of this word are cymotrichous (having wavy hair), trichotillomania (the compulsion to pull out one's hair), and its end result atrichia (baldness). Earliest documented use: 1880.] ""Madonna's Blonde Ambition tour notwithstanding, women really aspire to be lissotrichous brunettes, since sleekness and shine - the season's chief criteria - show much better on dark hair."""
mickle \MIK-uhl\	"noun: A large amount. adjective: Great, large. adverb: Much. [From Old English micel (much). Ultimately from the Indo-European root meg- (great), which is also the source of magnificent, maharajah, mahatma, master, mayor, maestro, magnate, magistrate, maximum, and magnify. Earliest documented use: 9th c. The word appears in the proverb ""Many a little makes a mickle"" and sometimes in its corrupted (and meaningless) form: ""Many a mickle makes a muckle.""] ""While blessed with an abundance of natural beauty and resources, Chatham County is also burdened with the task of dealing with a mickle of vegetative waste."" - Robert Drewry and Virginia Lamb; County Develops Yard Waste Program; Public Works Magazine (Chicago, Illinois); May 2000."
inwit \IN-wit\	"noun 1. Conscience. 2. Reason, intellect. 3. Courage. [From Old English inwit, from in + wit (mind, thought). Earliest documented use: 1230. The word is usually seen as part of the phrase agenbite of inwit. Agenbite (remorse) is literally, again-bite, a variant of ayenbite, from ayen (again) + bite. James Joyce reanimated this ancient term back into the language when he used it in Ulysses.] ""The Journals of Sylvia Plath may be intensely introspective, full of the agenbite of inwit, but they are just as intensely external, describing -- with an attentiveness one can't imagine in any male diarist -- food, furniture, hair, flowers, colours, and clothes."" - Blake Morrison; Love at First Bite; Independent On Sunday (London, UK); Apr 2, 2000."
aby \uh-BY\	"verb tr. To pay the penalty for. verb intr. To suffer, to endure. [From Old English abycgan (to pay for), from bycgan (to buy). Earliest documented use: before 1225.] ""'But we have you -- and you shall aby it.' There were knives drawn on every side of him as these words were spoken."" - Walter Scott; Quentin Durward; 1823."
reechy \REE-chee\	"adjective Smoky, dirty, or rancid. [From Old English rec (smoke). Earliest documented use: 1660.] ""The writing is fast and punchy, the gore reechy, the science mad as HG Wells."" - Meet 007 Jr; The Times of India (New Delhi, India); Apr 25, 2005."
mazard \MAZ-uhrd\	"noun Face, head, or skull. [From Middle English mazer (a large wooden drinking bowl), from mazer (a hardwood, especially maple). It's not clear how we got from the bowl to the head, perhaps from the shape of the bowl. Earliest documented use: 1584.] ""Shakespeare is really clear that the skull is handled roughly. You know, there's a line about being knocked about the mazard."""
sachem \SAY-chuhm\	"noun 1. The chief of a tribe or a federation. 2. A political leader. [From Algonquian.] ""Sen. Edward Kennedy is a family sachem ..."" - James J. Kilpatrick; My Satrap, Your Sachem, His Avatar; Chicago Sun-Times; Nov 24, 2002. ""Corruption often was nothing to get abashed about -- as Tammany Hall sachem George Washington Plunkitt explained in 1905: 'I see my opportunity and I take it... There's a distinction between honest graft and dishonest graft.'"" - Michael Powell; N.Y. Proposes To Leave the Parties Behind; Washington Post; Nov 1, 2003."
scrofulous \SKROF-yuh-luhs\	"adjective 1. Pertaining to, resembling, of the nature of, or affected with scrofula (primary tuberculosis of the lymphatic glands, especially those of the neck). 2. Morally tainted. [From scrofula, a tuberculosis of the lymph glands, especially of the neck. The word scrofula derives from Late Latin scrofulae, plural of scrofula, diminutive of Latin scrofa (breeding sow), perhaps from the belief that breeding sows were subject to the disease. In olden times it was believed that a royal touch would cure the disease, which was also known as ""king's evil"".] ""I am aware that there are no sleek pacers here, only scrofulous jugheads, square-gaiters with more fur on them than the coats on the society dames on the Via Veneto back in Rome."" - Jeff Wells; Punting with Les Mugs of Paris; The Daily Telegraph (Sydney, Australia); Jan 16, 1999. ""This crushing realization comes by way of a splendid roster of minor English characters, created by Mount for our amusement and Gus's torment. The scrofulous, self-pitying travel agent and racing-car enthusiast ..."" - Christopher Hitchens; Fairness; The Atlantic Monthly (Boston); Jul/Aug 2001."
noosphere \NOH-uh-sfeer\	"noun The sum of human knowledge, thought, and culture. [From French noösphere, from Greek noos (mind) + sphere. Earliest documented use: 1930.] ""This avalanche of information is threatening to swallow us whole, to waste our days and to overwhelm our own thoughts. Essentially, it's the noosphere on steroids."""
nutate \NOO-tayt, NYOO-\	"verb intr. 1. To nod the head. 2. To oscillate while rotating (as an astronomical body). 3. To move in a curving or circular fashion (as a plant stem, leaf, etc.). [Back-formation from nutation, from Latin nutare (to nod repeatedly), frequentative of -nuere (to nod), from numen (nod of the head, command, divine will). Earliest documented use: 1880.] ""Down she slides not wanting to lose consciousness, chin nutating into bosom, yet straining in her mind to stay present."" - Forrest Gander; As A Friend; New Directions; 2008. ""In pubs across the land, the customers speak of little else but lunar nutation, especially since the moon is nutating at this very moment."" - Tom Shields; Fur Coats and No Moral Fibre?; The Sunday Herald (Glasgow, Scotland); Oct 1, 2006. ""Tendrils of pea plants nutate in the air and when come in contact of any support, they coil around it."" - Competition Science Vision; Apr 1999."
pneumatic \noo-MAT-ik, nyoo-\	"adjective 1. Of or relating to air, wind, or gases. 2. Spiritual. 3. Buxom, zaftig. [From Greek pneuma (breath, wind, spirit). Ultimately from the Indo-European root pneu- (to breathe), which is also the source of pneumatic, pneumonia, apnea, sneer, sneeze, snort, snore, and pneumonoultramicroscopicsilicovolcanoconiosis. Earliest documented use: 1624.] ""This in itself set up a kind of suspicion about pneumatic claims that is, if someone said, 'The Spirit told me.'"""
dysthymia \dis-THY-mee-uh\	"noun A mild depression. [From Greek dys- (bad) + -thymia (mental disorder), from thymos (mind, soul). Earliest documented use: 1842.] ""It was as if my mood had been goaded away from situational discontentedness into a dysthymia that seemed now to be heading into full-fledged depression."" - Meghan Daum; Life Would Be Perfect If I Lived in That House; Knopf; 2011."
thole \THOHL\	"verb chiefly dialect: endure. [""Thole"" is one of the English language's oldest words -- it existed in Middle English in its current form and in Old English with the form ""tholian"" -- but in these modern times it tholes only in the corners of England's northern dialects. It has the same origin as ""tolerate"": both come from the Greek word ""tlenai,"" meaning ""to bear."" Unrelated to this ""thole"" is the (also very old) noun ""thole,"" which can be used as a synonym of ""peg"" or ""pin"" or can refer to either of a pair of pins set in the gunwale of a boat to hold an oar in place. This ""thole"" comes from Greek ""tylos,"" meaning ""knob"" or ""callus.""] ""There was now temptation to resist, as well as pain to thole."""
xylography \zye-LAH-gruh-fee\	"noun The art of making engravings on wood especially for printing. [""Xylography"" didn't appear in print in English until 1816, but it is linked to printing practices that are much older. In fact, the oldest known printed works (from Japan and China in the 8th and 9th centuries) were made by xylography, a printing technique that involves carving text in relief upon a wooden block, which is then inked and applied to paper. This method of wood-block printing appeared in Europe in the 14th century, and eventually inspired Johannes Gutenberg to create individual and reusable pieces of type out of metal. These days, ""xylography"" can also describe the technique of engraving wood for purely artistic purposes. English speakers picked up the word from French, where it was formed as a combination of ""xyl-,"" meaning ""wood,"" and ""-graphie,"" which denotes writing in a specified manner.] ""Also known as wood block printing, xylography proved to be cheaper and more efficient for printing Chinese, with its thousands of characters, so movable type did not supplant it there until modern times."""
autologous \ah-TOL-uh-guhs\	"adjective Involving a situation in which the donor and the recipient (of blood, skin, bone, etc.) are the same person. [From Greek auto- (self) + -logous (as in homologous), from logos (proportion, ratio, word). Earliest documented use: 1911.] ""They talked about autologous fat transfer, where they extract the fat from your behind and stick it in your face -- cheek to cheek, as it were."" - Isabel Wolff; A Vintage Affair; Bantam; 2010."
immanent \IM-uh-nuhnt\	"adjective 1. Inherent; spread throughout. 2. Subjective: taking place within the mind and having no effect outside of it. [From Latin immanere (to remain in place), from in- (in) + manere (to remain). Ultimately from the Indo-European root men- (to remain), which is also the source of mansion, manor, remain, and permanent (but not 'imminent' with which 'immanent' is often confused). Earliest documented use: 1535.] ""The invisible but somehow immanent presence of Sep 11's inferno over New Jersey serves to remind us that Updike has written about apocalypse before."" - Robert Stone; Updike's Other America; The New York Times; Jun 18, 2006."
fustian \FUSS-chun\	"noun 1. A strong cotton and linen fabric. 2. High-flown or affected writing or speech; broadly; anything high-flown or affected in style. [""Fustian"" has been used in English for a kind of cloth since the 13th century, but it didn't acquire its high-flown sense until at least three centuries later. One of the earliest known uses of the ""pretentious writing or speech"" sense occurs in Christopher Marlowe's play Doctor Faustus when Wagner says, ""Let thy left eye be diametarily [sic] fixed upon my right heel, with quasi vestigiis nostris insistere,"" and the clown replies, ""God forgive me, he speaks Dutch fustian."" The precise origins of the word ""fustian"" aren't clear. English picked it up from Anglo-French, which adopted it from Medieval Latin, but its roots beyond that point are a subject of some dispute.] ""Despite its fustian moments and overuse of exclamation points, I find Modern Love greatly moving."" - Michael Dirda; Scenes from a Marriage; The Washington Post; Oct 5, 2003."
yegg \YEG\	"noun Safecracker; also: robber. [""Safecracker"" first appeared in print in English around 1825, but English speakers evidently felt that they needed a more colorful word for this rather colorful profession. No one is quite sure where ""yegg"" came from. It first appeared in the New York Evening Post on June 23, 1903, in an article about ""the prompt breaking up of the organized gangs of professional beggars and yeggs."" By 1905, it had acquired the variant ""yeggmen,"" which was printed in the New York Times in reference to unsavory characters captured in the Bowery District. ""Yegg"" has always been, and continues to be, less common than ""safecracker,"" but it still turns up once in a while.] ""The book will end with [Victor Ribe], too, but only after he repeatedly disappears for chapters at a stretch, upstaged by a sadistically overpopulated ensemble of sundry grifters, grafters and hard-boiled yeggs."" - David Kipen; Channeling Hammett, Sort of; San Francisco Chronicle; Apr 14, 2002. ""With their millions in underwriting fees they were the true winners of the great bull market's endgame - they and the dazzling assortment of con artists, bucket shop crooks, mafia figures, and two-bit yeggs who emerged from the woodwork in the late nineties, hearing in the populist call a once-in-a-lifetime opportunity to fleece the suckers."" - Thomas Frank; One Market Under God; Doubleday; Oct 17, 2000."
Cook's tour \COOKS-TOOR\	"noun A rapid or cursory survey or review. [In 1841, British missionary Thomas Cook convinced a British railway to run a special train to a temperance meeting, then proceeded to find passengers for the trip, an event regarded as the beginning of organized tourism. Within a few years, Cook was setting up excursions on a regular basis, and by the century's end, the Thomas Cook & Son travel agency was orchestrating travel around the world. The agency's tours were famously well-organized, but they were also known for herding travelers hurriedly from location to location. A Cook's tourist might see an impressive array of famous sites, but often only in superficial glimpses. Over time, English speakers started using ""Cook's tour"" for any hurried tour, and later, for any rushed activity or cursory review.] ""The rest of the novel is an episodic Cook's tour of Filipino hell."" - Carolyn See; Heir to a Misfortune; The Washington Post; Sep 3, 2004. ""Never one to be subtle, Mr. Sinelli welcomed Bryant Keil with a 25-cent cook's tour."" - Cheryl Hall; Former Genghis Grill Owner Sees Sandwiches as Success in the Bag; The Dallas Morning News; Sep 25, 2004."
wellerism \WEL-uh-ri-zuhm\	"noun An expression involving a familiar proverb or quotation and its facetious sequel. It usually comprises three parts: statement, speaker, situation. [After Sam Weller and his father, characters known for such utterances in Charles Dickens's novel Pickwick Papers. Earliest documented use: 1839.] ""We'll have to rehearse that,"" said the undertaker as the coffin fell out of the car. ""Prevention is better than cure,"" said the pig when it ran away from the butcher."
gamp \gamp\	"noun A large umbrella. [After Sarah Gamp, a nurse in Charles Dickens's novel Martin Chuzzlewit. She carries a large umbrella. Earliest documented use: 1864.] ""By the time we fumble with our windcheaters and gamps, the air is dry once again."" Narayani Ganesh; City of Derry in Northern Ireland; The Economic Times (New Delhi, India); Dec 31, 2010."
prescind \prih-SIND\	"verb To withdraw one's attention. [""Prescind"" derives from the Latin verb ""praescindere,"" which means ""to cut off in front."" ""Praescindere,"" in turn, was formed by combining ""prae-"" (""before"") and ""scindere"" (""to cut"" or ""to split""). So it should come as no surprise that when ""prescind"" began being used during the 17th century, it referred to ""cutting off"" one’s attention from a subject. An earlier (now archaic) sense was even clearer about the etymological origins of the word, with the meaning ""to cut short, off, or away"" or ""to sever."" Other descendants of ""scindere"" include ""rescind"" and the rare ""scissile"" (""capable of being cut"").] ""If we prescind from the main issue for a moment, there is much to be gained by studying some corollary questions."""
duende \doo-EN-day\	"noun 1. Demon; goblin. 2. The power to attract through personal magnetism and charm. [The word ""duende"" refers to a spirit in Spanish, Portuguese, and Filipino folklore and literally means ""ghost"" or ""goblin"" in Spanish. It is believed to derive from the phrase ""dueno de casa,"" which means ""owner of a house."" The term is traditionally used in flamenco music or other art forms to refer to the mystical or powerful force given off by a performer to draw in the audience. The Spanish poet Federico Garcia Lorca wrote in his essay ""Teoria y Juego del Duende"" (""Play and Theory of the Duende"") that duende ""is a power and not a behavior . . . a struggle and not a concept."" Nowadays the term appears in a broader range of contexts to refer to one's unspoken charm or allure.] ""A key part of the myth of authenticity is duende, the spirit that inhabits the soloist at the climax of a performance."" - Louise Levene; It's Good to Sing; Independent (London, UK); Feb 4, 1997. ""'If I don't get up here and paint, if I don't get up here and work on some kind of sculpture, I don't feel that I'm living. The duende says, 'Come on: Do it! Do it! Do it!'"" - Dan Sperling; Ever-driven Anthony Quinn; USA Today; Aug 5, 1987."
Apollonian \ap-uh-LOH-nee-uhn\	"adjective Serene; harmonious; disciplined; well-balanced. [After Apollo, the god of music, poetry, prophecy, healing, and more in Greek and Roman mythologies. He is considered the opposite of his brother, Dionysus. Earliest documented use: 1664.] ""The end result was that the once-Dionysian Jagger became trapped in the crisp, precise Apollonian realm and was no longer capable of producing lyrics that matched Richards's thunderous, blues-based inventions."""
Babbitt \BAB-it\	"noun A person and especially a business or professional man who conforms unthinkingly to prevailing middle-class standards. [He was a prosperous real-estate broker, a pillar of his Midwestern community, and a believer in success for its own sake. George F. Babbitt was his name and complacent American middle-class values were his game. He was created by Sinclair Lewis in the satirical 1922 novel Babbitt, and the fictional protagonist's name quickly became a synonym for one who adheres to a conformist, materialistic, unimaginative way of life.] ""The candidate's economic agenda appeals to the frugal Babbitts in his constituency."""
felicitate \fih-LISS-uh-tayt\	"verb 1. To consider happy or fortunate. 2. To offer congratulations to. [""Felix,"" a Latin adjective meaning ""happy"" or ""fruitful,"" is the root of our English words ""felicity"" and ""felicitate."" The former is the older of the two; it dates back to the 14th century and refers to the state of being happy or to something that makes people happy. When writing King Lear, William Shakespeare was probably pleased when he thought of the word ""felicitate"" as an adjective meaning ""made happy,"" but not everyone took a shine to it and it fell into disuse. However, people were happy to pick up ""felicitate"" as a verb meaning ""to make happy."" That meaning is now considered archaic but it was the seed for other meanings of the word. ""Felicitate"" eventually grew to mean ""to consider happy or fortunate"" and ""to congratulate.""] ""The other swimmers politely felicitated the winner of the race."""
glom \glom\	"verb tr. 1. To steal. 2. To seize or grab. 3. To look at. verb intr. To latch onto something. noun A glimpse. [Probably alteration of Scots glam/glaum (to snatch at). Earliest documented use: 1907.] ""There will still be a mixture of homegrown material and features glommed from Wired's American edition."" - Bobbie Johnson; The UK Gets reWired; The Guardian (London, UK); Mar 23, 2009. ""Aaron, two years old, was happily smearing his face with ketchup-soaked fries and glomming the fish in his little mouth."" - Peter Kuitenbrouwer; Fish and Chips Biz is Just Ducky; National Post (Canada); Mar 15, 2010. ""Scads of lesser imitators have glommed onto Strait's pop savvy but not necessarily the musicianship that lies at the core of it."" - Jason Bracelin; Strait Talk; Las Vegas Review-Journal; Feb 5, 2010."
quietus \kwye-EE-tus\	"noun 1. A final stroke that settles something. 2. Discharge from life; death. 3. A release from a duty or debt. [In the early 1500s, English speakers adopted the Medieval Latin phrase ""quietus est"" (literally ""he is quit"") as the name for the writ of discharge exempting a baron or knight from payment of a knight's fee to the king. The expression was later shortened to ""quietus"" and applied to the termination of any debt. William Shakespeare was the first to use ""quietus"" as a metaphor for the termination of life: ""For who would bear the whips and scorns of time, ... When he himself might his quietus make / With a bare bodkin?"" (Hamlet). The third meaning, which is more influenced by ""quiet"" than ""quit,"" appeared in the 19th century. It often occurs in the phrase ""put the quietus on"" (as in, ""The bad news put the quietus on their celebration"").] ""The irony is, of course, that the Curse will provide its own quietus and lead me to the peace I have so desperately sought."" Michael Bywater, Not With a Whimper But With a Bang, Independent on Sunday (London, UK), May 19, 1996."
instauration \in-staw-RAY-shun\	"noun 1. Renewal; renovation; restoration. 2. An act of founding or establishing something. [""Instauration"" first appeared in English in the early 17th century, a product of the Latin verb ""instaurare,"" meaning ""to renew or restore."" This same source gave us our verb ""store,"" by way of Middle English and Anglo-French. Less than 20 years after ""instauration"" broke into English, the philosopher Francis Bacon began writing his Instauratio Magna, which translates to The Great Instauration. This uncompleted collection of works, which was written in Latin, calls for a restoration to a state of paradise on earth, but one in which mankind is enlightened by knowledge and truth.] ""Universities are, since their instauration in Bologna, Salerno, or medieval Paris, fragile, although tenacious, beasts."" George Steiner; An Academic Comes of Age in 'The Sleepless City'; The Chronicle of Higher Education (Washington); Feb 6, 1998."
sylph \SILF\	"noun 1. An elemental being in the theory of Paracelsus that inhabits air. 2. A slender graceful woman or girl. [Paracelsus was a man with a vivid imagination. He concocted an elaborate theory of ruling ""elemental spirits"": gnomes controlled the earth, salamanders fire, undines water, and sylphs (graceful beings whose name in English is from New Latin ""sylphus"") the air. You would hardly believe this 16th-century German-Swiss physician had his feet on the ground, but those fantastic ideas were balanced with an impressive array of solid medical discoveries. In fact, many of his scientific contributions are still highly respected, but his sylph idea has long since been discounted as fairy-tale fantasy. The creatures remain only as romantic figures of literature, art, and ballet, where diaphanous woodland sylphs are often depicted enchanting unwary males.] ""But alluring though the fitness industry looks, it is not without risks. The biggest is Britons' fond self-delusion that they are sleek sylphs."" Losing a Beer Belly; The Economist (London, UK); Aug 12, 1995. ""Like an ugly duckling which has blossomed into a slender sylph, the compact convertible from Stuttgart has finally added some style to a fair amount of substance."" Samuel Ee; New kind of SLeeK; The Business Times (Singapore); Mar 20, 2004."
doxy \DOK-see\	"noun 1. A mistress or a promiscuous woman. 2. Opinion or doctrine. [For 1: Of uncertain origin, perhaps from obsolete Dutch docke (doll). Earliest documented use: around 1530. For 2: Back-formed from orthodoxy, heterodoxy, etc. From Greek doxa (opinion), from dokein (to think). Ultimately from the Indo-European root dek- (to take or accept), which is also the root of words such as paradox, orthodox, doctor, disciple, discipline, doctrine, dogma, decent, decorate, dignity, disdain, condign, and deign. Earliest documented use: around 1730.] ""The arresting officer would still be filling out paperwork and the doxy would be collecting her things and heading back to the street."" - Neil Steinberg; Blinded by Race; Chicago Sun-Times; Dec 31, 2008. ""In that twilight zone of the Anglican double standard, orthodoxy is really just a word for my doxy. Heterodoxy means everyone else's doxy."" - Hywel Williams; Let Us All Err and Stray; The Guardian (London, UK); Jul 8, 2003."
enceinte \en-SANT, ahn*-SANT\ *this syllable is nasal	"adjective Pregnant. noun Fortification around a fort, castle, or town; area so enclosed. [Does having an enceinte make a place impregnable? Despite similar sounds, the word impregnable has nothing to do with impregnate. The former is from Latin prendre (to seize, take) while the latter is from gignere (to bring into being).] ""Now comes word from Star that Britney Spears knew she was enceinte in January, but waited to tell Federline, because she was worried he wouldn't be happy."""
oppugn \uh-PYOON\	"verb 1. To fight against. 2. To call in question. [""Oppugn"" was first recorded in English in the 15th century. It came to Middle English from the Latin verb ""oppugnare,"" which in turn derived from the combination of ""ob-,"" meaning ""against,"" and ""pugnare,"" meaning ""to fight."" ""Pugnare"" itself is descended from the same ancient word that gave Latin the word ""pugnus,"" meaning ""fist."" It's no surprise, then, that ""oppugn"" was adopted into English to refer to fighting against something or someone, either physically (as in ""the dictatorship will oppugn all who oppose it"") or verbally (as in ""oppugn an argument""). Other descendants of ""pugnare"" in English include the equally aggressive ""pugnacious,"" ""impugn,"" ""repugnant,"" and the rare ""inexpugnable"" (""incapable of being subdued or overthrown"").] “President Susilo Bambang Yudhoyono last week put the blame on the media, accusing media organizations of destroying the party’s image. Furthermore, he oppugned press credibility.” - Donny Syofyan; Blame Game and Political Suicide of Indonesian Elites; The Jakarta Post (Indonesia); Jul 25, 2011."
resile \rih-ZYLE\	"verb Recoil, retract; especially: to return to a prior position. [""Resile"" is a resilient word; it's been around in English since at least 1529. It's also a cousin of ""resilient"" — both words derive from the Latin verb ""resilire,"" which means to ""jump back"" or ""recoil."" (""Resilire"" in turn comes from ""salire,"" meaning ""to jump."") ""Resilient"" focuses on the ability of something to ""bounce back"" from damage, whereas ""resile"" generally applies to someone or something that withdraws from an agreement or ""jumps back"" from a stated position. ""Resile"" is a word that shows up only occasionally in U.S. sources; it is more common in British and especially Australian English.] ""Once there is such a respite, they could engage in a meaningful dialogue with the Andolan* on how both sides could resile from their hardened positions and strike a compromise."" - Darryl D'Monte; Storm in Narmada Valley; The Independent (Bangladesh); Aug 6, 1999. * From Hindi Andolan (agitation, protest)"
pace \PAY-see\	"preposition Contrary to the opinion of — usually used as an expression of deference to someone's contrary opinion. [Though used in English for nearly 150 years, the preposition ""pace"" has yet to shed its Latin mantle, and for that reason it's most at home in formal writing or in contexts in which one is playing at formality. The Latin word ""pace"" is a form of ""pax,"" meaning ""peace"" or ""permission,"" and when used sincerely the word does indeed suggest a desire for both. This Latin borrowing is unrelated to the more common noun ""pace"" (as in ""keeping pace"") and its related verb (""pacing the room""); these also come from Latin, but from the word ""pandere,"" meaning ""to spread.""] Pace everyone with a smartphone, I think e-mail is best written and read—and the wilds of the Internet best explored—in the privacy of one's own domicile. ""Pace Mr. Jiang, I submit that this kind of political idealism is wishful thinking. It simply does not accord with human nature, especially the nature of human groups, nor is it supported by the lessons of history."" — From the 2011 book The Renaissance of Confucianism in Contemporary China, edited by Ruiping Fan"
abstruse \ub-STROOSS\	"adjective Difficult to comprehend. [Look closely at the following Latin verbs, all of which are derived from the verb ""trudere"" (""to push""): ""extrudere,"" ""intrudere,"" ""obtrudere,"" ""protrudere."" Each of these Latin verbs has an English descendant whose meaning involves pushing or thrusting. Another ""trudere"" offspring, ""abstrudere"", meaning ""to push away"" or ""to conceal,"" gave English ""abstrude,"" meaning ""to thrust away."" But that verb didn't make it past the 17th century. The ""abstrudere"" descendant that did survive is ""abstruse,"" an adjective that recalls the meaning of its Latin parent ""abstrusus,"" meaning ""concealed.""] ""It was the kind of spectacle that policy wonks savor — three days of complex and abstruse arguments before the U.S. Supreme Court...."""
nestor \NES-tuhr\	"noun A wise old man. [From Nestor, king of Pylos, who was the oldest and wisest of the Greeks and served as a counselor in the Trojan War. Earliest documented use: around 1510.] ""Roland Shaw was not only an oil man; he was the Nestor of the oil business, there when the first donkey nodded."""
kickshaw \KIK-shaw\	"noun 1. A fancy dish; delicacy. 2. A trinket. [From phonetic respelling of French quelque chose (something) as kickshaws which was treated as a plural and turned into the singular kickshaw. Earliest documented use: 1598.] ""I assume it's a gloriously handsome affair ... slices of homemade seed cake and other toothsome kickshaws."" - Jonathan Glancey; Mrs Beckett; Building Design (UK); Oct 24, 2008. ""A more sophisticated eye might cringe at the odd little kickshaws displayed about the room, but I appreciated the whimsy."" - Amanda Stevens; The Prophet; Harlequin; 2012."
discomfit \dis-KUHM-fit\	"verb tr. 1. To confuse or embarrass. 2. To thwart the plans of. [From Old French desconfit (defeated), past participle of desconfire (to defeat), from des- (not) + confire (to make), from Latin facere (to make). Earliest documented use: around 1230.] ""Berlusconi accuses politically motivated prosecutors of leaking details of investigations to discomfit him."" - Unbalanced Scales; The Economist (London, UK); Oct 8, 2011."
avulse \uh-VUHLS\	"verb tr. To pull off or tear away. [From Latin avellere (to tear off), from a- (away from) + vellere (to pull, pluck). Earliest documented use: before 1765.] ""[The Hoh River] chews, it gnaws and jumps around, avulsing in a tantrum of energy to new channels, taking anything in its way right along with it."""
cachinnate \KAK-uh-nayt\	"verb To laugh loudly or immoderately. [""Cachinnate"" has been whooping it up in English since the 19th century. The word derives from the Latin verb ""cachinnare,"" meaning ""to laugh loudly,"" and ""cachinnare"" was probably coined in imitation of a loud laugh. As such, ""cachinnare"" is much like the Old English ""ceahhetan,"" the Old High German ""kachazzen,"" and the Greek ""kachazein"" — all words of imitative origin that essentially meant ""to laugh loudly."" Our word ""cackle"" has a different ancestor than any of these words (the Middle English ""cakelen""), but this word, too, is believed to have been modeled after the sound of laughter.] ""'Butler' is so deliciously zany and funny, we cachinnated until our sides hurt."" - Christopher Muther; It's Oh So Quiet; Boston Globe (Massachusetts); Mar 20, 2004."
torrid \TOR-id\	"adjective 1. a) Parched with heat especially of the sun; hot. b) Giving off intense heat; scorching. 2. Ardent, passionate. [""Torrid"" derives from the Latin verb torrēre, which means ""to burn"" or ""to parch"" and is an ancestor of our word ""toast."" Despite the dry implications of this root, it is also an ancestor of ""torrent,"" which can refer to a violent stream of liquid (as in ""a torrent of rain""). ""Torrid"" first appeared in English in the 16th century, and was originally used to describe something burned or scorched by exposure to the sun. The term ""torrid zone"" later came about to refer to tropical regions of the Earth. By the end of that century the word had taken on the extended meaning that we know today — suggesting fiery passion.] ""The deodar cedar, although really a cool climate tree, has adjusted very nicely to the South's torrid climate."""
boniface \BAH-nuh-fuss\	"noun The proprietor of a hotel, nightclub, or restaurant. [""Boniface"" has been the name of eight popes, one antipope, and one saint, but none of those had anything (directly) to do with the English word ""boniface."" The word ""boniface"" comes from the name of the jovial innkeeper in George Farquhar's 1707 play ""The Beaux' Strategem,"" the story of two penniless rakes who determine that one of them must find and marry a wealthy lady. Farquhar's play made more than one contribution to the English language. The name of the character of Lady Bountiful is a byword for a generous (and often conspicuously so) philanthropist. Farquhar, incidentally, never got to see the influence his play had on the lexicon. He finished ""The Beaux' Strategem"" on his deathbed, and died on the night of its third performance.] ""Jones' retirement will be celebrated, but it also means that for the first time in 45 years, the city's oldest hotel is in need of a new boniface."""
consuetudinary \kon-swi-TOOD-n-er-ee, -TYOOD-\	"adjective Customary. [From Latin consuetude (custom), from consuescere (to accustom), from con- (with) + suescere (to accustom). Earliest documented use: 1590.] ""Soon she'll welcome me with a bear hug, her sweet smile, and her consuetudinary greeting: My princess!"" - My Teacher, My Queen; The Miami Herald (Florida); May 5, 2000."
fugacious \fyoo-GAY-shus\	"adjective Lasting a short time; evanescent. [""Fugacious"" is often used to describe immaterial things like emotions, but not always. Botanists, for example, use it to describe plant parts that wither or fall off before the usual time. Things that are fugacious are fleeting, and etymologically they can also be said to be fleeing. ""Fugacious"" derives from the Latin verb ""fugere,"" which means ""to flee."" Other descendants of ""fugere"" include ""fugitive,"" ""refuge,"" and ""subterfuge.""] ""We must realise and be ever conscious of the fact that life is fugacious and ephemeral."" - Bobson Gbinije; Reflections at Christmas; This Day (Lagos, Nigeria); Nov 15, 2004."
cunctator \kungk-TAY-tuhr\	"noun One who hesitates; a procrastinator or delayer. [From Latin cunctari (to hesitate, delay). Earliest documented use: 1654.] ""No cunctator, James quickly provided his wife with the surefire ammunition to divorce him -- adultery."" - Richard Kepler Brunner; With Marriage Penalty, It Can Pay to Get Divorced; The Morning Call (Allentown, Pennsylvania); Oct 3, 1999."
flaneur \flah-NUHR\	"noun An idler or loafer; a man about town. [From French flâneur (stroller, idler), from flâner (to stroll). Earliest documented use: 1854.] ""In Dessaix's delightful contribution to the genre, he turns himself into a modern-day literary flaneur -- that is, one with a round-the-world air ticket."" - A Magnificent Buffoon; Financial Times (London, UK); Jan 28, 2005. ""The dandy, on the other hand, is a flâneur, a jaded, narcissistic observer well-suited to the 7280 cell phone, whose screen becomes a mirror when not in use."" - Ed Tenner; Digital Dandies; Technology Review (Cambridge, Massachusetts); Jan 2005."
dasypygal \da-si-PYE-gul\	"adjective Having hairy buttocks. [From Greek dasy- (hairy, dense) + pyge (buttocks). A related word is dasymeter, an instrument for measuring the..., no, not that, rather the density of gases. Another related word is callipygian, having a beautiful behind.] ""That way, if they will just turn their caps through 180 degrees, and the volume of their in-car stereos down a bit, and pull their trousers up over their dasypygal features, there might be hope, yet."""
excerebrose /eks-SER-ee-bros/	"adjective Brainless. [From Latin ex- (out of) + cerebrum (brain).] ""(Dvija Michael) Bertish, in a vituperative March letter that virtually demands the presence of an unabridged dictionary, complained that 'The excerebrose followers of Pastor White, many of whom are convicted felons...'"""
facinorous (fa-SIN-uhr-uhs)	"adjective Extremely wicked. [From Latin facinorous, from facinus (bad deed), from facere (to do or make).] ""O ambitious Marius! O cruel Catiline! O facinorous Sylla!"" Miguel de Cervantes; Don Quixote (Translation by Thomas Shelton)."
ithyphallic /ith-uh-FAL-ik/	"adjective 1. Of or relating to the phallus carried in procession in ancient Bacchic festivals. 2. Indecent or salacious. 3. Having an erect phallus. [From Late Latin ithyphallicus, from Greek ithyphallikos, from ithyphallos, from ithys (straight) + phallos (phallus).] ""Luxor Temple is more comprehensible than the vaster ruins at Karnak. It was also dedicated to Amun - but to a different manifestation of the same god, associated with fertility and often shown in ithyphallic form."""
labrose /LA-bros/	"adjective Having thick or large lips. [From Latin labrosus, from labrum (lip). Other words derived from the same Latin root are lip, labial, and labret (an ornament worn in a pierced lip).] ""Maybe yu wouldn't mind talling us, my labrose lad ..."" James Joyce; Finnegans Wake; 1939."
zoophyte /ZO-uh-fyt/	"noun An animal (such as sponge, coral, sea anemone, etc.) resembling a plant. [These invertebrate animals are attached to a surface and have a branched structure, hence zoophyte, literally animal plant, from Modern Latin zoophyton, from Greek zoophyton, from zoo- (animal) + phyton (plant).] ""Did you know that sponges were zoophytes, or that they had domestic lives as complicated as any soap opera character's?"" - Philip Herter; Foreign Correspondence Series; St. Petersburg Times (Florida); Jun 9, 2002."
quisquilian /kwis-KWIL-ee-uhn/	"adjective Worthless, trifling. [From Latin quisquiliae (waste, rubbish).] ""It is painful to attack a writer as young in years and in time spent working at his craft as Chris Columbus, yet what are we to make of someone whose credits to date include Reckless, Gremlins, Goonies and the quisquilian subject under examination here?"" - Harlan Ellison and Leonard Maltin; Harlan Ellison's Watching; M Press; 2008."
papuliferous /pa-pu-LIF-uhr-uhs/ also papilliferous	"adjective Having pimples. [From Latin papula (pimple) + -ferous (bearing).] ""He was immediately sympathetic when I told him about the bishop's book, and the papuliferous exegete's laboring of it."" H.L. Mencken; Heathen Days: 1890-1936."
napiform /NAY-puh-form/	"adjective Turnip-shaped: round at the top and tapering down sharply at the bottom. [From Latin napus (turnip) + -form.] ""'Is he upstairs, is that it?' she demanded of the blunted eyes and napiform head of the elder Thompson."" - T. Coraghessan Boyle; Riven Rock; Penguin; 1999. ""He took a napiform bun from the bread basket and, nibbling its nobble, said ..."" - Reginald Hill; Recalled to Life; Dell Publishing; 1993."
ventripotent /ven-TRI-pot-ehnt/	"adjective Having a large belly; gluttonous. [From French, from Latin ventri- (abdomen) + potent (powerful). The word ventriloquism, the art of speaking such that the voice seems to come from somewhere else, is derived from the same root. Ventriloquism is, literally speaking, speaking from the belly.] ""This wight ventripotent was dining Once at the Grocers' Hall, and lining With calipee and calipash That tomb omnivorous -- his paunch."" Horace Smith; The Astronomical Alderman; 19th century. (Calipee and calipash are parts of a turtle beneath the lower and upper shields, respectively) ""The actor must, at all costs, inflict upon you the well-oiled machinery of ventripotence, whereas, to the reader, it is his mind which drips fatness."" - James Evershed Agate; A View of ""The Beggar's Opera""; 1922."
thersitical /thur-SIT-i-kuhl/	"adjective Foulmouthed; scurrilous. [After Thersites, a Greek in Iliad known for his abusive and foulmouthed nature. He called Agamemnon greedy and Achilles a coward.] ""The self-described beneficiaries of most of this I.Q. increase, Princeton's 'Smart Fans,' have railed at season's end against thersitical cheers and jouncing the stands at basketball games."""
saponaceous /sap-uh-NAY-shus/	"adjective Soapy, slippery, evasive. [From New Latin saponaceus, from Latin sapon- (soap).] ""Is this meant to be a fable about the power of the media (in the person of the saponaceous [Ross]) to expose secrets and destroy relatively innocent lives?"" - Barbara D. Phillips; Theater: Animal Passions; The Wall Street Journal (New York); Mar 13, 2002. ""Perhaps the most revealing incident is the chapter on the kidnapping of Roger Tamraz. Tamraz, a saponaceous Lebanese businessman."" - Walid Harb; Books & the Arts: 'Snake Eat Snake'; The Nation (New York); Jul 19, 1999."
cognoscente \kahn-yuh-SHEN-tee\ plural cognoscenti	"noun A person who has expert knowledge in a subject; connoisseur. [""Cognoscente"" and ""connoisseur"" are more than synonyms; they're also linguistic cousins. Both terms descend from the Latin verb ""cognoscere,"" meaning ""to know,"" and they're not alone. You might guess that ""cognizance"" and ""cognition"" are members of the ""cognoscere"" clan. Do you also recognize a family resemblance in ""recognize""? Can you see through the disguise of ""incognito""? Did you have a premonition that we would mention ""precognition""? ""Cognoscente"" itself came to English by way of Italian and has been a part of our language since the late 1700s.] ""Some passages in Hergé, Son of Tintin seem directed at the cognoscenti. The excursions into prewar Belgian politics are not for everyone."" - Cullen Murphy; Georges Remi: Learning His Lines; The New York Times; Jan 20, 2012."
ratiocinate \rash-ee-OS-uh-nayt, rat-ee-\	"verb intr. To reason, especially in a methodical manner. [Edgar Allan Poe is said to have called the 1841 story The Murders in the Rue Morgue his first ""tale of ratiocination."" Many today agree with his assessment and consider that Poe classic to be the world's first detective story. Poe didn't actually use ""ratiocination"" in Rue Morgue, but the term does appear three times in its 1842 sequel, The Mystery of Marie Roget. In Marie Roget, the author proved his reasoning ability (""ratiocination"" traces to ""ratio,"" Latin for ""reason"" or ""computation""). The second tale is based on an actual murder, and as the case unfolded after the publication of Poe's work, it became clear that his fictional detective had done an amazing job of reasoning through the crime. From Latin ratiocinari (to reckon), from ratio (reason, calculation). Ultimately from the Indo-European root ar- (to fit together), which also gave us army, harmony, article, order, read, adorn, arithmetic, and rhyme. Earliest documented use: 1643.] ""But we're here to see Downey [playing Sherlock Holmes] ratiocinate his way in and around the movie."" - Ty Burr; Movie Review: Sherlock Holmes; The Boston Globe; Dec 25, 2009."
ahimsa \uh-HIM-sah\	"noun The Hindu and Buddhist doctrine of refraining from harming any living being. [""Ahimsa"" has been part of the English language since at least the late 19th century, but the word didn't gain the attention of the English-speaking world until the first half of the 20th century, when it was recognized as an important component of the teachings of Mahatma Gandhi. ""Ahimsa"" comes from a Sanskrit word meaning ""noninjury,"" and Gandhi's policy of nonviolent protest played a crucial role in the political and social changes that eventually led to India's independence from Britain in 1947.] ""As my conception of ahimsa went on maturing, I became more vigilant about my thought and speech. The lines in the Anthem: Scatter her enemies And make them fall; Confound their politics, Frustrate their knavish tricks particularly jarred upon my sentiments of Ahimsa."" M.K. Gandhi; The Story of My Experiments With Truth; 1927. ""The young man has renounced his violent past and now adheres to the doctrine of ahimsa."""
perdure \puhr-DOOR, -DYOOR\	"verb intr. To continue to exist; endure. [From Latin per- (through) + durare (to last), from durus (hard). Earliest documented use: 1475.] ""The regime is gone; the images perdure."""
monish \MON-ish\	"verb tr. To warn; to admonish. [From Old French amonester (to warn, to urge), from Latin monere (to warn). Ultimately from the Indo-European root men- (to think) which is the source of mind, mnemonic, mosaic, music, mentor, money, mandarin, and Sanskrit mantra. Earliest documented use: before 1382.] ""I believe that I have monished him with his greatest fears."" - Dan Clore; The Unspeakable and Others; Wildside Press; 2001."
esthesia or aesthesia \es-THEES-zhuh\	"noun The capacity for sensation. [Back formation from anesthesia (loss of sensation), from Greek an- (not) + aisthesis (sensation). Earliest documented use: 1829; anesthesia is from 1721.] ""Choo began to experience a dearth of aesthesia."" - Martin Dec Haynes; Anything Goes; Xlibris; 2011."
ablate \a-BLAYT\	"verb tr. To remove by melting, vaporizing, erosion, etc. verb intr. To become ablated. [Back-formation from ablation, from Latin ab- (away) + ferre (to carry). Earliest documented use: before 1475; ablation is from 1425.] ""My anger scoured my insides, burned my love for him out of me, ablated my heart's interior walls."" - Arthur Phillips; The Tragedy of Arthur; Random House; 2012."
versal \VUHR-suhl\	"adjective Universal; whole. [Shortening of universal, from Latin universum (universe). Ultimately from the Indo-European root wer- (to turn or bend), also the source of wring, weird, writhe, worth, revert, universe, verso, versicolor, and animadvert. Earliest documented use: 1590s, in Romeo & Juliet.] ""She looks as pale as any clout in the versal world."" William Shakespeare; Romeo & Juliet; 1590s."
pandect \PAN-dekt\	"noun 1. A complete code of the laws of a country or system of law. 2. A treatise covering an entire subject. [The original pandect was the ""Pandectae,"" a massive fifty-volume digest of Roman civil law that was created under the emperor Justinian in the 6th century. The Latin word ""pandectae"" is the plural of ""pandectes,"" which means ""encyclopedic work"" or ""book that contains everything."" ""Pandectes"" in turn derives from the Greek ""pandektēs"" (""all-receiving""), from ""pan-"" (""all"") and ""dechesthai"" (""to receive""). When the word ""pandect"" first cropped up in English in the mid-16th century, it referred to the complete code of laws of a particular country or system. Its ""comprehensive treatise"" sense developed later that century.] ""Stability and support operations are not, within the pandect of modern conflict, considered war at all but 'military operations other than war,'...."" — From an article by Tom Bissell in Harper’s Magazine, January 2006"
volant \VOH-lunt\	"adjective 1. Having the wings extended as if in flight — used of a heraldic bird. 2. Flying or capable of flying. 3. Quick, nimble. [English picked up ""volant"" from Middle French. The term survives in Modern French as well, both as an adjective having essentially the same meaning as the English term, and as a noun with several meanings (among them ""shuttlecock""). The influence of French can be seen doubly in the heraldic sense of ""volant"": in heraldic contexts, as in our first example sentence above, the adjective ""volant"" almost always appears after the noun — a syntax picked up from French along with the meaning. Ultimately, ""volant"" comes from the Latin verb ""volare,"" meaning ""to fly."" Another word that came to English through Middle French from ""volare"" is ""volley,"" which refers to things flying back and forth through the air.] ""One prominent feature of the family's crest is a hawk volant."""
a fortiori \a fort-tee-OR-ee\	"adverb For an even stronger reason; even more so. [From Latin, literally from the stronger.] ""'If your argument is good for this case, then your argument is a fortiori good for testing everyone in school,' Justice David H. Souter told Linda M. Meoli, the lawyer representing Independent School District No. 92 ..."" Linda Greenhouse; Supreme Court Seems Ready To Extend School Drug Tests; The New York Times; Mar 20, 2002."
billet-doux \bil-ay-DOO\ plural billets-doux \bil-ay-DOOZ\	"noun A love letter. [From French billet doux (love letter), from billet (note) + doux (sweet). Earliest documented use: 1673.] ""Pete Hamill, journalist and novelist, loves his city and this novel is his billet-doux."" - Margaret Cannon; New in Crime Fiction; The Globe and Mail (Toronto, Canada); Dec 9, 2011."
pudeur \pyoo-DUHR, -DUH\	"noun A sense of shame, especially in sexual matters; modesty. [From French pudeur (modesty), from Latin pudere (to make or be ashamed) which also gave us pudibund (prudish) and pudency (modesty). Earliest documented use: 1876.] ""Alexandra Styron first started reading her father's novel Sophie's Choice as soon as it came out, in 1979, when she was a preteenager. A few chapters in, encountering a steamy sex scene, she rushed from the room, overcome with adolescent pudeur."" - Liesl Schillinger; Literary Lions, by Their Cubs; The New York Times; Aug 10, 2011."
wifty \WIF-tee\	"adjective Eccentrically silly, giddy, or inane; ditzy. [""Wifty"" is a synonym of ""ditzy."" And, like ""ditzy,"" its origins remain unknown. The earliest known print appearance of ""wifty"" is in a quotation that appeared in the Delaware County Daily Times (Chester, Pennsylvania) in 1972, though the word was certainly being used in spoken English before that. ""Ditzy"" appears to be almost as old as ""wifty""—we are able to trace it back to at least 1974. But ""dizzy,"" which in its Old English origins meant ""foolish"" or ""stupid,"" has been used in a sense similar to ""ditzy"" or ""wifty"" since the 16th century.] ""The [American Idol] judges only have to lounge around, and make some wifty comment about the performance."" — From a column by David Hiltbrand in the Philadelphia Inquirer, January 7, 2012"
cote \koht\	"noun A shelter for animals. verb tr. To pass by. [For noun: From Old English cote (cottage). For verb: Of uncertain origin.] ""The doves in the cote above flutter, as always, and settle down again."" Brian Jackson; Streaming; Routledge; 2012. ""We coted them on the way and hither are they coming to offer you service."" William Shakespeare; Hamlet; 1603."
fisc \fisk\	"noun A state treasury; exchequer. [From French fisc (tax office), from Latin fiscus (treasury, purse). Earliest documented use: 1598.] ""Houses of worship are free to open schools, but they are expected to pay for them with privately raised funds. None are given access to the public fisc."" Rob Boston; Amendment Anxiety; Church & State (Washington, DC); Feb 2012."
coze or cose \kohz\	"verb intr. To converse in a friendly manner. noun A friendly talk. [From French causer (to chat), from Latin causari (to plead, discuss), from causa (case, cause). Earliest documented use: 1814.] ""She darted a look to the two women cozing over tea."" - Patricia Rice; The Wicked Wyckerly; Signet; 2010."
sine die \SY-nee DY-ee, SIN-ay DEE-ay\	"adverb Indefinitely; without designating a future day for action or meeting. [From Latin sine (without) die (day). Earliest documented use: 1631.] ""Following the discord, the meeting was adjourned sine die."" Meet Turns Into Bedlam; The Times of India (New Delhi); Jun 13, 2012."
agee or ajee \uh-JEE\	"adverb To one side; awry. [From Scottish English dialect, from a- (to, toward) + gee (a command to a horse to move to one side). Earliest documented use: before 1805.] ""The knaves go all agee when both my lord and myself have our backs turned."" - Charlotte M. Yonge; Grisly Grisell; Macmillan; 1893."
plage \PLAHZH\	"noun 1. The beach of a seaside resort. 2. A bright region on the sun caused by the light emitted by clouds of calcium or hydrogen and often associated with a sunspot. [If you've been lying on a resort beach contemplating the brightness of the sun, today's word is doubly appropriate. The history of ""plage"" begins with the Greek word ""plagios,"" meaning ""sideways"" or ""oblique,"" and then moves over to Late Latin as ""plagia."" It arrived on the shores of southern Italy in the form of Italian ""piaggia"" and was used of the beaches there. It became ""plage"" in French and coasted into the English language in 1888. The word acquired its ""bright region of the sun"" sense in the mid-20th century.] ""Vying with Aquitaine for diversity within a single region, the Rhône-Alpes take you from plage to peak via a millennia or two of communities wonderfully wearing their history in their stones."" — From an article by Simon Calder in The Independent (London), May 26, 2012"
intestine \in-TESS-tin\	"adjective Internal; specifically, of or relating to the internal affairs of a state or country. [We bet you thought ""intestine"" was a noun referring to a part of the digestive system! It is, of course, but naming that internal body part isn't the word's only function. Both the noun and the adjective ""intestine"" have been a part of English since the 15th century, and both trace to the Latin adjective ""intestinus,"" meaning ""internal,"" and ultimately to ""intus,"" meaning ""within."" Though the adjective ""intestine"" turns up much less frequently than does its anatomical cousin, it does see occasional use, especially as a synonym for ""civil"" and ""domestic"" (in contrast to ""foreign"") applied to wars and disturbances.] ""Last week U.N. Secretary General Ban Ki-moon instructed Valerie Amos to leave for Syria in order to assess the humanitarian situation in the country and agree with the authorities on ways to provide aid to the population hit by the intestine war."" — From an article by the ITAR-TASS News Agency, March 1, 2012"
vilipend \VIL-uh-pend\	"verb 1. To hold or treat as of little worth or account. 2. To express a low opinion of; disparage. [""Vilipend"" first appeared in English in the 15th century and comes to us through French from the Latin roots ""vilis,"" meaning ""cheap"" or ""vile,"" plus ""pendere,"" meaning ""to weigh"" or ""to estimate."" These roots work in tandem to form a meaning of ""to deem to be of little worth."" Both of those roots have weighed in heavily as a source of common English words. Other ""vilis"" offspring include ""vile"" and ""vilify,"" while ""pendere"" has spawned such terms as ""append,"" ""expend,"" and ""dispense.""] ""But many accepted canine breeds began in lowly circumstances. No matter how we may vilipend their names, denying their cuteness is difficult."" — From Bill Casselman's 2010 book Where a Dobdob Meets a Dikdik"
gimbal \GHIM-bul\	"noun A device that permits a body to incline freely in any direction or suspends it so that it will remain level when its support is tipped — usually used in plural; called also gimbal ring. [One place you might encounter gimbals is on a ship, where they are used to keep compasses and other things level with the horizon in contrast to the pitch and roll of the vessel at sea. The word ""gimbal"" is an alteration of ""gemel,"" a word for a type of finger-ring popular in the 16th century that could be divided into two separate rings. The word comes from Anglo-French ""gemel"" (""twin""), which in turn comes from Latin ""gemellus,"" a diminutive of ""geminus,"" the Latin word for ""twin.""] ""When the vessel turns upright in the ocean, much of the furniture and equipment swings on gimbals so that it is in the right place when the ship becomes perfectly vertical."" — From an article by Gary Robbins in The San Diego Union-Tribune, June 25, 2012"
tonsorial \tahn-SOR-ee-ul\	"adjective Of or relating to a barber or the work of a barber. [""Tonsorial"" is a fancy word that describes the work of those who give shaves and haircuts. (It can apply more broadly to hairdressers as well.) It derives from the Latin verb ""tondēre,"" meaning ""to shear, clip or crop."" (Another descendant, ""tonsor,"" is an archaic word for a barber.) You might be more familiar with the related noun ""tonsure,"" which refers to the shaven crown or patch worn by monks and other clerics, or the religious rite of clipping the head of one being admitted as a cleric. The verb ""tonsure"" means ""to shave the head of.""] ""Rookie Adam Henrique is trying to spark the Devils with a tonsorial adjustment. Henrique has shaved off his beard, leaving him with a bristly mustache for Game 4."" — From an Associated Press article appearing in the Wall Street Journal, June 5, 2012"
mettlesome \MET-ul-sum\	"adjective Full of vigor and stamina; spirited. [The 17th-century adjective ""mettlesome"" (popularly used of spirited horses) sometimes appeared as the variant ""metalsome."" That's not surprising. In the 16th century and for some time after, ""mettle"" was a variant spelling of ""metal""—that is, the word for substances such as gold, copper, and iron. (""Metal"" itself dates from the 14th century and descends from a Greek term meaning ""mine"" or ""metal."") The 16th century was also when ""metal""—or ""mettle""—acquired the figurative sense of ""spirit,"" ""courage,"" or ""stamina."" However, by the early 18th century, dictionaries were noting the distinction between ""metal,"" used for the substance, and ""mettle,"" used for ""spirit,"" so that nowadays the words ""mettle"" and ""mettlesome"" are rarely associated with ""metal.""] ""An accomplished actor, Prete writes electrifying dialogue, and his galvanizing descriptions are poetic and mettlesome."" — From a book review Donna Seaman in Booklist, March 15, 2012"
wiseacre \WYZE-ay-ker\	"noun One who pretends to knowledge or cleverness; especially; smart aleck. [Given the spelling and definition of ""wiseacre,"" you might guess that the word derives from the sense of ""wise"" meaning ""insolent"" or ""fresh""—the sense that gives us ""wisecrack"" and ""wisenheimer."" But, in fact, ""wiseacre"" came to English by a different route; it derived from the Middle Dutch ""wijssegger"" (meaning ""soothsayer""), a modification of the Old High German ""wīzzago."" ""Wiseacre"" first appeared in English way back in the late 16th century, while the ""insolent"" sense of ""wise"" and the words formed from it are products of the 19th and 20th centuries. The etymologies of ""wiseacre"" and ""wise"" are not completely distinct, however; the ancestors of ""wiseacre"" are loosely tied to the same Old English root that gave us ""wise.""] ""Following the stuttering relationship between Billy Crystal's smart wiseacre and Meg Ryan's prim moralist, the film undoubtedly owed something to Woody Allen's Annie Hall."" — From an article in The Irish Times, June 28, 2012"
precis /pray-SEE, PRAY-see/ plural precis /pray-SEEZ, PRAY-seez/	"noun A concise summary. verb tr. To make a concise summary. [From French précis (precise), from Latin praecisus (curtailed), past participle of praecidere (to shorten). Earliest documented use: 1760.] ""We'd end [the review] with a pithy precis of our thoughts on the novel."" Alex Preston; Gold by Chris Cleave; The Observer (London, UK); Jun 2, 2012."
betimes \bih-TYMZ\	"adverb 1. Sometimes; on occasion. 2. In good time; early. 3. Quickly; soon. [From Middle English bitimes, from bi (by) + time. Earliest documented use: 1314.] ""Since Knott was leaving in the morning, she went to bed betimes."" Betty Neels; Roses Have Thorns; Harlequin; 2012."
larruping \LAR-uh-ping\	"adverb Very. adjective Excellent. [From larrup (to beat or thrash), of uncertain origin. Perhaps from Dutch larpen (to thrash). Earliest documented use: 1888.] ""Little lady, you got any more of these larruping good biscuits?"" Bandit's Hope; Marcia Gruver; Barbour Books; 2011."
oriflamme \OR-uh-flam\	"noun A banner, symbol, or ideal inspiring devotion or courage. [The original ""oriflamme"" was the banner of Saint Denis, a patron saint of France who is said to have been the first bishop of Paris. Middle English speakers referred to this red or reddish orange banner using the Middle French term ""oriflamble,"" from Old French ""ori flambe,"" meaning ""small flag."" From the 12th to the 15th centuries, French kings carried the banner into battle as a way of inspiring their troops. This tactic met with such success that, by 1600, English speakers were using ""oriflamme"" to refer to any group's rallying symbol.] ""Researchers now think there's a da Vinci painting underneath. The Italian phrase on that little oriflamme, or battle banner, is what reporters say inspired today's search by contemporary engineer Maurizio Seracini."" — From an article by Robert Morrison in The Examiner (Washington, DC), April 4, 2012"
chichi \SHEE-shee\	"adjective Affectedly elegant. noun Showy stylishness. [From French, of imitative origin. Earliest documented use: 1908.] ""If all that sounds too chichi, get back to basics with the traditional present -- socks."" - Bazaar; The Independent (London); Nov 2, 1996."
aught \AWT\	"pronoun 1. Anything 2. All, everything. [""If you know aught which does behove my knowledge / Thereof to be inform'd, imprison't not / In ignorant concealment,"" Polixenes begs Camillo in Shakespeare's The Winter's Tale, employing the ""anything"" sense of ""aught."" Shakespeare didn't coin the pronoun ""aught,"" which has been a part of the English language since before the 12th century, but he did put it to frequent use. Writers today may be less likely to use ""aught"" than were their literary predecessors, but the pronoun does continue to turn up occasionally. ""Aught"" can also be a noun meaning ""zero,"" and the phrase ""the aughts"" has been bandied about as a proposed label for the decade that began in the year 2000.] ""He dropped, dead, into the shallow water, but I was too late for aught but revenge."" — From Judson Roberts' 2011 novel Viking Warrior"
weald \WEELD\	"noun 1. A heavily wooded area; forest. 2. A wild or uncultivated usually upland region. [If ""weald"" were a tree, it would have many annual rings. It has been in use as a general word for ""forest"" since the days of Old English, and it has also long been used, in its capitalized form, as a geographic name for a once-heavily forested region of southeast England. ""Weald"" is also often capitalized today when used to refer to wooded areas like the Weald of Kent and the Weald of Sussex in England. In time, the word branched out to designate any wild and uncultivated upland regions. A related word is ""wold,"" meaning ""an upland plain or stretch of rolling land.""] ""Challenger's house was on the very edge of the hill, and from its southern face, in which was the study window, one looked across the vast stretch of the weald to where the gentle curves of the South Downs formed an undulating horizon."" — From Sir Arthur Conan Doyle's 1913 novella The Poison Belt"
corpus delicti \KOR-puhs di-LIK-ty, -tee\	"noun The concrete evidence that shows that a crime has been committed, for example, the body of the victim in the case of a murder. [From Latin, literally body of crime. Earliest documented use: 1705.] ""The fact that the State was unable to produce a corpus delicti was a very strong point in favor of the defendants."" Sidney Sheldon; The Other Side of Midnight; HarperCollins; 2010."
gibbous \JIB-us\	"adjective 1 a) Marked by convexity or swelling. b) Of the moon or a planet; seen with more than half but not all of the apparent disk illuminated. 2. Having a hump; humpbacked. [The adjective ""gibbous"" has its origins in the Latin noun ""gibbus,"" meaning ""hump,"" and in the Late Latin adjective ""gibbosus,"" meaning ""humpbacked,"" which Middle English adopted in the 14th century as ""gibbous."" ""Gibbous"" has been used to describe the rounded body parts of humans and animals (such as the back of a hunchback or camel) or to describe the shape of certain flowers (such as snapdragons). The term is most often identified, however, with the study of astronomy. In fact, if you run across the word ""gibbous,"" chances are you'll find the word ""moon"" somewhere nearby. A gibbous moon is one that is more than a half-moon but less than full.] ""With a simple triangular sweep, you can see the clouds and moons of Jupiter, mountains and craters on the Moon, and the fat gibbous form of Venus."" — From a report on WKBN.com (Youngstown, Ohio), December 26, 2011"
palisade \pal-uh-SAYD\	"noun 1. a) A fence of stakes especially for defense. b) A long strong stake pointed at the top and set close with others as a defense. 2. A line of bold cliffs. [""Palisade"" derives via French from the Latin noun ""palus,"" meaning ""stake."" The word originally applied to one of a series of stakes set in a row to form an enclosure or fortification. ""The Palisades"" is also the name given to the line of traprock cliffs that stretches for about 15 miles along the western bank of the Hudson River in southeastern New York and northern New Jersey. Purportedly, these cliffs got their name from the resemblance of the tall rocks to rows of stakes or trees, although who exactly came up with the name is a matter of dispute. Before long ""palisade"" came to refer to any similar formation of tall cliffs.] ""What is known as Wenlock Edge, a great palisade, almost 1,000 feet high, running for 15 miles through the county of Shropshire, overlooks, near its eastern end, the tidy town of Much Wenlock."" — From an article by Frank Deford in Smithsonian, July-August 2012"
cui bono \KWEE BOH-noh\	"noun To whose benefit? [From Latin, literally, to whose advantage? Earliest documented use: 1604. Cui bono is the idea that the responsibility for an act can usually be determined by asking who stands to gain as a result of the act. It's first recorded in a speech by Cicero attributing it to the Roman consul Lucius Cassius. If he were speaking today he would say: Follow the money.] ""Cui bono? Surprise, surprise, it's the banks."" - Carol Hunt; Debt Would Be a Release Next to This Travesty; Irish Independent (Dublin, Ireland); Jan 29, 2012."
de minimis \dee-MIN-uh-mus\	"adjective Lacking significance or importance; so minor as to merit disregard. [Proponents of readable prose over jargon and legalese might argue that the last thing 20th-century American jurisprudence needed was another Latin term. Yet here we have a legal term that entered English only around 1950. Perhaps we should clarify: the legal doctrine of ""de minimis non curat lex"" (""the law does not concern itself with trifling matters"") has been around for a while, but use of ""de minimis"" on its own is relatively recent. At first, the shortened phrase was simply used to refer to the legal doctrine itself (""the de minimis rule""). Then it came to be used more broadly as an adjective (""de minimis contacts with the defendant""). Finally, ""de minimis"" leaked out of the courtroom and into the world at large.] ""Williams told council members that a letter written by borough solicitor Kenelm Shirk III in response to her initial complaint described peeling paint and other problems as 'de minimis,' or trivial."" — From an article by Kimberly Marselas in Intelligencer Journal/New Era (Lancaster, Pennsylvania), April 11, 2012"
naff /naf/	"adjective 1. Very unstylish or unsophisticated. 2. Useless; of poor quality. [Origin unknown, perhaps from Polari slang. Earliest documented use: 1950s.] ""The entire point of the original mod movement was to reject the naff rocker look."" - Clean Sweep; Vogue (New York); May 2011."
dyslogistic \diss-luh-JISS-tik\	"adjective Uncomplimentary; Conveying disapproval or censure; not eulogistic. [Logic would lead one to believe that ""dyslogistic"" is somehow related to the Greek word ""logos,"" from which the words ""logic"" and ""logistics"" are derived. In actuality, however, ""dyslogistic"" is a 19th-century merger of the prefix ""dys-,"" meaning ""bad,"" and ""eulogy,"" referring to an expression of praise. English jurist and philosopher Jeremy Bentham (1748-1832) often used ""dyslogistic"" in his writings as an adjective to convey dispraise or opprobrium. And even today the word is likely to be encountered in judicial and intellectual writings.] ""One answer lies in ... the dyslogistic school of memoir written by former officials who present themselves as disillusioned innocents."" — From a book review by Jacob Heilbrunn in The New York Times, June 22, 2008"
ramose \RAY-mohss\	"adjective Consisting of or having branches. [The adjective ""ramose"" is used to describe things that are branched, as in ""ramose sponges,"" ""ramose corals,"" or even ""ramose trees."" This branching can also be figurative, as in our second example above. ""Ramose"" was borrowed from the Latin ""ramosus"" (""branched"") in the 17th century. In the 15th century, the Latin ""ramosus"" had also been borrowed by English, by way of the Middle French ""rameux,"" as ""ramous,"" a word nearly identical in meaning and usage to ""ramose."" The root of ""ramosus,"" the Latin noun ""ramus"" (""branch""), is also the source, by way of Medieval Latin ""ramificare"" and Middle French ""ramifier,"" of the English verb ""ramify.""] ""This decision pushed the Iraqi scene into ramose labyrinths and added to the extremely complex questions...."" — From an article by BBC Monitoring, April 21, 2010"
suss \suhs\	"verb tr. To inspect, investigate, or to figure out. [By shortening of suspect, from Latin sub- (below) + specere (to look). Earliest documented use: 1953.] ""Within moments a swarm of small drones could arrive on the scene, to suss it [the location of the gunshot] out for the cops."" Nick Paumgarten; Here's Looking At You; The New Yorker; May 14, 2012."
dundrearies \dun-DREER-eez\	"noun plural Long flowing sideburns. [In the United States, Our American Cousin by Tom Taylor is often best remembered as the play Abraham Lincoln was watching at Ford's Theatre in Washington, D.C., when he was assassinated by John Wilkes Booth. Word lovers may also recall that the show gave us ""dundrearies,"" a name for the long, bushy sideburns (called ""Piccadilly weepers"" in England). The term for that particular men's hair fashion, which was popular between 1840 and 1870, comes from the name of Lord Dundreary, a character in the play who sported those elegant whiskers. The name can also be used in the attributive form ""dundreary whiskers.""] ""Although as a Victorian man he lacks the vocabulary to express it, he is living out the existentialist crisis, confronting absurdity and nothingness in cravat and dundrearies."" — From Thomas C. Foster's 2008 book How to Read Novels Like a Professor: A Jaunty Exploration of the World's Favorite Literary Form"
lulu \LOO-loo\	"noun A remarkable person, idea, or thing. [Perhaps from the nickname for Louise. Earliest documented use: 1886.] ""I told my students about an incident from my boyhood, my first-ever interaction with a fungus, and it was a lulu."" - Robert Klose; The Three-Legged Woman and Other Excursions in Teaching; University Press of New England; 2010."
sansculotte \sanz-koo-LAHT\	"noun 1. An extreme radical republican in France at the time of the Revolution. 2. A radical or violent extremist in politics. [At the time of the French Revolution (1787-1799), knee breeches (""culottes"" in French) were the height of fashion for aristocratic men. The men of the general populace could not afford such impractical finery and instead wore the ""pantaloon"" (long trousers). When the poorer classes rose up against the government, members of the Revolutionary army used this difference in dress to distinguish themselves from the aristocracy, calling themselves ""soldats sans culottes,"" literally, ""soldiers without culottes."" Almost immediately, ""sansculotte"" became a noun in both French and English.] ""At the time of the French Revolution, the rampaging sansculottes wrecked churches and every sign of monarchal or religious authority."" — From Peter Manseau's 2009 book Rag and Bone"
belaud \bih-LAWD\	"verb To praise usually to excess. [You may recognize the word ""laud"" (meaning ""to praise or extol"") in ""belaud."" In fact, ""belaud"" was formed by combining the prefix ""be-"" and the verb ""laud."" Since ""be-"" can denote both ""to a greater degree"" and ""excessively or ostentatiously,"" it perhaps should come as no surprise that while ""laud"" may imply praise to a deserved degree, ""belaud"" often has the connotations of unreasonable or undeserved praise. Incidentally, both ""laud"" and by extension ""belaud"" derive from the Latin verb ""laudere,"" which in turn traces back to ""laud-,"" meaning ""praise."" Other descendants of ""laud-"" in English include ""laudatory,"" ""laudable,"" and even ""laudation,"" meaning ""an act of praising.""] ""Several cheers went up. Piccard, unaware of the scene unfolding behind him, seemed to think they were meant to belaud his plan."" — From Jake Silverstein's 2011 book Nothing Happened and Then It Did: A Chronicle in Fact and Fiction"
lucriferous \loo-KRIF-uhr-uhs\	"adjective Lucrative, profitable. [From Latin lucrum (profit) + -ferous (producing). Earliest documented use: 1648.] ""Freed from any ambition to leave my heirs rich, I had no need to pursue lucriferous experiments, to which I so much preferred luciferous [providing light or insight] ones."" - Chemist and physicist Robert Boyle (1627-1691), who gave us Boyle's Law of gases, in a letter to John Locke, 17th c."
aliment \AL-uh-munt\	"noun Food, nutriment; also, sustenance. [These days you're most likely to encounter ""aliment"" as a typo for ""ailment,"" but the word was less of a rarity in the late 18th and early 19th centuries. And the word's history goes back even further than that. It dates to the 15th century and comes from Latin ""alere,"" meaning ""to nourish,"" by way of ""alimentum."" Although ""aliment"" is uncommon in today's English, you may recognize it in the somewhat technical term ""alimentary canal""—the name for the long tube in the body through which food passes after it is eaten. ""Aliment"" also functions as a verb meaning ""to give aliment to,"" or ""to nourish or sustain.""] ""In the Propontis, as far as I can learn, none of that peculiar substance called brit is to be found, the aliment of the right whale."" — From Herman Melville's 1851 novel Moby Dick"
inimitable \in-IM-it-uh-bul\	"adjective Not capable of being imitated; matchless. [Something that is inimitable is, literally, not able to be imitated. In actual usage the word describes things so uniquely extraordinary as to not be copied or equaled, which is why you often hear it used to praise outstanding talents or performances. (The antonym ""imitable"" describes things that are common or ordinary and could easily be replicated or surpassed.) ""Inimitable"" derives via Middle English from Latin ""inimitabilis."" Be careful not to confuse it with ""inimical"" or ""inimicable,"" two adjectives meaning hostile or harmful; those words derive from the same Latin root that gave us ""enemy"" (""inimicus"").] ""He is involved in roughly six projects, most of them part time and some dormant. Each is different from the others and to each, say those who work with him, he adds something inimitable."" From an article by Timothy Finn in the Kansas City Star, July 18, 2012"
besot \bi-ˈsät, bē-\	verb 1. Infatuate. 2. To make dull or stupid; especially, to muddle with drunkenness.
futhark \FOO-thahrk\	"noun Any of several alphabets used by the Germanic peoples from about the 3rd to the 13th centuries — called also the runic alphabet. [The word ""futhark"" describes an alphabet originally of 24 and later of some 16 angular characters. It is suspected to be derived from both Latin and Greek and was used for inscriptions and magic signs by the Germanic peoples, and especially by the Scandinavians and Anglo-Saxons, from about the third to the 13th centuries. The spelling ""futhark"" is from the first six symbols of the runic alphabet: f, u, th, a, r, k. The alphabet did, however, encounter revision of letters over time resulting in the variants ""futhorc"" and ""futhork.""] ""The oldest rune alphabet, and the purest magically, is the elder German futhark of twenty-four runes."" — From Donald Tyson's 2009 book Runic Astrology"
inter alia \IN-ter AH-li-ah\	Latin. Among other things.
invidious /in-VID-ee-uhs/	"adjective Unjust, offensive, or hateful, and likely to arouse resentment, ill will, anger, etc. [From Latin invidiosus (envious, envied, hostile), from invidia (envy, hostility), from videre (to see). Ultimately from the Indo-European root weid- (to see) that is also the source of words such as guide, wise, vision, advice, idea, story, and history.] ""A small wrinkle of worry crosses Sword Gusmao's brow as she discusses her husband's invidious position."" Steve Waldon; Kirsty's Crusade; The Age (Melbourne, Australia); Nov 1, 2006."
exigent /EK-si-jent/	"adjective 1. Requiring urgent attention. 2. Demanding; exacting. [From Latin exigent-, stem of exigens, present participle of exigere (to demand, to drive out), from ex- + agere (to drive). Ultimately from the Indo-European root ag- (to drive, draw) that is also the source of such words as act, agent, agitate, litigate, synagogue, and ambassador.] ""Taiwan's vast reserves of foreign exchange can be tapped once, perhaps twice, in exigent times. But these reserves ... must be used sparingly."" Mark T. Fung; Rumblings from Taiwan; The Christian Science Monitor (Boston, Massachusetts); Jan 10, 2001."
opaque /oh-PAYk/	adjective 1. Not transparent or translucent; impenetrable to light; not allowing light to pass through. 2. Not transmitting radiation, sound, heat, etc. 3. Not shining or bright; dark; dull. 4. Hard to understand; not clear or lucid; obscure: The problem remains opaque despite explanations. 5. Dull, stupid, or unintelligent.
hiemal \HY-uh-muhl\	"adjective Of or relating to winter. [From Latin hiems (winter). Ultimately from the Indo-European root ghei- (winter), which is the ancestor of words such as chimera, hibernate, and the Himalayas (from Sanskrit him (snow) + alaya (abode)). Earliest documented use: 1560.] ""Painted turtles tend to move into deeper water during the autumnal season, and dormancy occurs during the hiemal period."" - Carl Ernst and Jeffrey Lovich; Turtles of the United States and Canada; The Johns Hopkins University Press; 2009."
incommodious \in-kuh-MOH-dee-uhs\	"adjective Inconvenient or uncomfortable. From Latin commodus (convenient), from com- (with) + modus (mode, measure). Ultimately from the Indo-European root med- (to take appropriate measures), which is also the source of medicine, modern, modify, modest, modulate, discommode and incommode. Earliest documented use: 1551.] ""An incommodious little wooden house is where this deaf teacher lived."" - Tamara Eidelman; Kaluga's Rocket Scientist; Russian Life; (Montpelier, Vermont); Sep/Oct 2007."
orphic \OR-fik\	"adjective 1. Capitalized; of or relating to Orpheus or the rites or doctrines ascribed to him. 2. Of, relating to, being, or resembling an oracle; oracular, mystic. 3. Fascinating, entrancing. [Orpheus was a hero of Greek mythology who was supposed to possess superhuman musical skills. With his legendary lyre, he was said to be able to make even the rocks and trees dance around. In fact, when his wife Eurydice died, he was nearly able to use his lyre to secure her return from the underworld. Later on, according to legend, he was killed at the bidding of Dionysus, and an oracle of Orpheus was established that came to rival the oracle of Apollo at Delphi. Because of the oracle of Orpheus, ""orphic"" can mean ""oracular."" Because of Orpheus' musical powers, ""orphic"" can mean ""entrancing.""] ""'No summer ever came back, and no two summers ever were alike,' said I, with a degree of Orphic wisdom that astonished myself."" — From Nathaniel Hawthorne's 1852 novel The Blithedale Romance"
emolument \ih-MAHL-yuh-munt\	"noun The returns arising from office or employment usually in the form of compensation or perquisites. [""To Sir Thomas Williams Person of the Parish ... of Saint Andrew at Baynards Castle in London for his yearly pension 40 shillings ... in recompense of certain offerings, oblations, and emoluments unto the said benefice due...."" Thus was recorded in ""The Wardrobe Accounts of Edward the Fourth,"" along with every expense of the realm, the first ever known use of ""emolument."" By the year 1480, when that entry was made, Latin ""emolumentum"" had come to mean simply ""profit"" or ""gain""; it had become removed from its own Latin predecessor, the verb ""molere,"" meaning ""to grind."" The original connection between the noun and this verb was its reference to the profit or gain from grinding another's grain. (The notion of grinding away at our jobs didn't show up in our language until the 1800s.)] ""For her first six years Johnson, though serving full-time on the court with the same responsibilities and emoluments as her colleagues, was officially styled an appeal-court judge on permanent assignment upstairs."" — From an article by James Gill in the Times-Picayune (New Orleans), July 11, 2012"
forsooth \fer-SOOTH\	"adverb In truth; indeed — often used to imply contempt or doubt. [Although it is still a part of the English language, ""forsooth"" is now primarily used in humorous or ironic contexts, or in a manner intended to play off the word's archaic vibe. ""Forsooth"" is formed from the combination of the preposition ""for"" and the noun ""sooth."" ""Sooth"" survives as both a noun (meaning ""truth"" or ""reality"") and an adjective (meaning ""true,"" ""sweet,"" or ""soft""), though it is rarely used by contemporary speakers. It primarily lives on in English in the verb ""soothe"" (which originally meant ""to show, assert, or confirm the truth of"") and in the noun ""soothsayer"" (that is, ""truthsayer""), a name for someone who can predict the future.] ""Forsooth, your kids aren't into Shakespeare? They will be once they see the Rebel Shakespeare Company."" — From an article by Elizabeth Gehrman in The Boston Globe, April 22, 2012"
crepitate /KREP-i-tayt/	"verb intr. To make a crackling or popping sound. [From Latin crepitare (to crackle), frequentative of crepare (to rattle, crack). Earliest documented use: 1623.] ""John Grisham's sentences thud and crepitate all over the page, and he has become a literary tycoon."" Gene Weingarten; The Fiddler in the Subway; Simon & Schuster; 2010."
ramify /RAM-i-fy/	"verb tr., intr. To divide into branches. [From Latin ramus (branch). Ultimately from the Indo-European root wrad- (root) which also sprouted words such as root, wort, licorice, radical, radish, rutabaga, eradicate, and deracinate. Earliest documented use: 1425.] ""Andrew offered to read me a handful of passages from the manuscript ... which had ramified so uncontrollably that it was turning into several distinct projects."" Nicolas Rothwell; The Red Highway; Black Inc.; 2009."
adhibit \ad-HIB-it\	"verb tr. 1. To let in; admit. 2. To administer. 3. To affix or attach. [From Latin adhibere (to bring to), from ad- (to) + habere (to have, hold). Ultimately from the Indo-European root ghabh- (to give or to receive), which is also the source of give, gift, able, habit, prohibit, due, duty, and habile. Earliest documented use: 1528.] ""Morgiana asked the druggist for more medicine and essences such as are adhibited to the sick when at death's door."" Translator: Richard Burton; Ali Baba and The Forty Thieves."
redoubtable /re-DOU-tuh-buhl/	"adjective Arousing fear or awe; evoking respect or honor. [From Middle English redoubtabel, from Old French redoutable, from redouter (to dread), from re- (again) + douter (to doubt, fear). Redoubtable ultimately derives from Indo-European root *dwo-, meaning two. A person of two minds about something is in doubt or dubious. The uncertainty of doubt can give rise to fear, even dread. Thus, a redoubtable person is to be feared, or at least respected. In contrast, a fact too apparent even to be doubted is indubitable.] ""But Charles having got over to Scotland, where the men of the Solemn League and Covenant led him a prodigiously dull life, and made him very weary with long sermons and grim Sundays, the Parliament called the redoubtable Oliver home to knock the Scottish men on the head for setting up that prince."" Charles Dickens; A Child's History Of England; 1854."
carillon /KAR-i-lon/	"noun A set of stationary bells in a tower, usually played from a keyboard. [From Late Latin quaternion, via Old French quarregnon (by fours) with reference to the fact that the original carillon consisted of four bells hung in the tower of a church.] ""Get down to Sydney University to experience a free carillon recital. Edward Grantham, honorary carillonist, the University of Sydney and the University of Sydney War Memorial Carillon are commemorating the 197 staff and students who died in World War I."" Things To Do; The Sunday Telegraph (Sydney, Australia); Aug 4, 2002."
coadunate /ko-AJ-uh-nit, -nayt/	"adjective United by growth; closely joined. [From Late Latin coadunatus, past participle of coadunare, to combine, a compound word from Latin co- (together) + ad- (toward) + unus (one). Coadunate ultimately derives from Indo-European *oi-no, meaning one, unique. Less obvious words derived from this root include anon, atone, lonely, eleven, ounce and inch. The lowly onion may also be in this family, conceived as a unity formed of many layers.] ""I descend from my high home in the Financial District to plunge into the coadunate streams of pedestrians ..."""
douceur /doo-SUHR/	"noun A tip or bribe. [From French douceur (sweetness), from Late Latin dulcor (sweetness), from Latin dulcis (sweet). What does dulcimer (a musical instrument), billet-doux (love letter), dolce (music direction) have in common with today's word? All derive from the same Latin root and involve the idea of sweetness.] ""But even the most jaundiced observers have been astonished by the discovery of a slush fund of some pounds 40 million from which the douceur to (Charles) Haughey was ladled."" Kevin Myers, Ireland's Shame: The Prime Minister and the Tycoon, The Sunday Telegraph (London), Jul 13, 1997."
devoir \duh-VWAHR\	"noun 1. Duty, responsibility. 2. A usually formal act of civility or respect. [""Devoir"" was borrowed twice, in a manner of speaking. We first borrowed it in its Anglo-French form, ""dever,"" back in the days of Middle English. As is so often the case when an adopted word becomes established in English, its pronunciation shifted to conform to English pronunciation standards. The French put the stress on the last syllable, but English speakers stressed the first. One hundred or so years later, some writers changed the English spelling to ""devoir"" to match the modern French. That French borrowing was actually pronounced like French (as well as English speakers could, anyway)—just as it is today.] ""The Grand Master, having allowed the apology of Albert Malvoisin, commanded the herald to stand forth and do his devoir."" — From Sir Walter Scott's 1819 novel Ivanhoe"
morphean /mor-FEE-uhn/	"adjective 1. Sleep-inducing. 2. Of or related to sleep or drowsiness. [After Morpheus, the god of dreams in Greek mythology. He was the son of Hypnos, the god of sleep. The name of the drug morph ine is also derived after Morpheus. Earliest documented use: 1641.] ""The audience at the Institute of Directors convention began to drift off under the Morphean influence of such tired words as 'stakeholder' and 'strategic'."" Khalid Aziz; Speaking Out; Management Today (Teddington, UK); Sep 2003."
decorticate /dee-KOR-ti-kayt/	"verb tr. To remove the outer layer, such as the bark, husk, rind, etc. [From Latin decorticare (to peel), from de- (from) + cortex (bark). Ultimately from the Indo-European root sker- (to cut), which is also the source of skirt, curt, screw, shard, shears, carnage, carnivorous, carnation, sharp, scrape, and excoriate. Earliest documented use: 1611.] ""The idea, the sensation, the moment of intuition are decorticated and communicated with intimacy and lucidity."" Marguerite Dorian; Demon in Brackets; World Literature Today; Jun 1995."
mense /mens/	"noun Propriety, decorum. verb tr. To adorn, grace. [From Middle English menske (honor), from Old Norse mennska (humanity). Earliest documented use: before 1525. ""Auld Vandal! ye but show your little mense, Just much about it wi' your scanty sense: Will your poor, narrow foot-path of a street, Where twa wheel-barrows tremble when they meet."" Robert Burns; The Brigs Of Ayr; 1787. These lines are from a poem Burns wrote about a dialog between two bridges when the construction of a new bridge began over the Ayr in Scotland in 1786. The Auld Brig retorts to the above mocking by New Brig that one shouldn't get carried away in vanity and pride: ""I'll be a brig when ye're a shapeless cairn!"" The poet's words proved prophetic when in the 1877 flood the New Brig collapsed into a heap of stones while the Auld Brig still stands.]"
nuncupative \NUN-kyoo-pay-tiv\	"adjective Spoken rather than written; oral. [""Nuncupative"" (from Latin ""nuncupare,"" meaning ""to name"") has been part of the English language since at least the mid-16th century, most typically appearing in legal contexts as a modifier of the noun ""will."" The nuncupative will originated in Roman law, where it consisted of an oral declaration made in the presence of seven witnesses and later presented before a magistrate. Currently, nuncupative wills are allowed in some U.S. states in extreme circumstances, such as imminent peril of death from a terminal illness or from military or maritime service. Such wills are dictated orally but are usually required to be set down in writing within a statutorily specified time period, such as 30 days. Witnesses are required, though the number seven is no longer specified.] ""He left me a small Legacy in a nuncupative Will, as a Token of his Kindness for me."" — From The Autobiography of Benjamin Franklin (1706-1790)"
fecund \FEK-und\	"adjective 1. Fruitful in offspring or vegetation; prolific. 2. Intellectually productive or inventive to a marked degree. [""Fecund"" and its synonyms ""fruitful"" and ""fertile"" all mean producing or capable of producing offspring or fruit—literally or figuratively. ""Fecund"" applies to things that yield offspring, fruit, or results in abundance or with rapidity (""a fecund herd""; ""a fecund imagination""). ""Fruitful"" emphasizes abundance, too, and often adds the implication that the results attained are desirable or useful (""fruitful plains""; ""a fruitful discussion""). ""Fertile"" implies the power to reproduce (""a fertile woman"") or the power to assist in reproduction, growth, or development (""fertile soil""; ""a fertile climate for artists"").] ""Sea slugs that mate more than the absolute minimum necessary to retain female fertility are more fecund than slugs that mate less often, according to the study detailed Wednesday in the open-access journal PLoS ONE."" — From an article by Stephanie Pappas on NBCNews.com, August 22, 2012"
Pollyanna \pol-ee-AN-uh\	"noun A naively cheerful and optimistic person. [After Pollyanna Whittier, heroine of novels by Eleanor Porter (1868-1920). Pollyanna is an indefatigable optimist and teaches everyone to play the ""glad game"": find something to be glad about, no matter what tragedy befalls. Earliest documented use: 1917.] ""So the doctrine of positive thinking does not require you to close your eyes and ears to the world. It does not require you to become a Pollyanna, calling everything wonderful, no matter how horrid it is."" A Thought About Negative Thinking; Deccan Chronicle (India); Sep 16, 2012."
cassandra /kuh-SAND-ruh/	"noun One who prophesies disaster and whose warnings are unheeded. [After Cassandra in Greek mythology who received the gift of prophecy but was later cursed never to be believed. Earliest documented use: 1670. Cassandra was the daughter of the Trojan king Priam and Hecuba. Apollo, the god of light, who also controlled the fine arts, music, and eloquence, granted her the ability to see the future. But when she didn't return his love, he condemned her never to be believed. Among other things, Cassandra warned about the Trojan horse that the Greeks left but her warning was ignored.] ""I had become a Cassandra -- I could see bad things on the road ahead but couldn't stop us from recklessly rolling over them."" Douglas Edwards; I'm Feeling Lucky: The Confessions of Google Employee Number 59; Houghton Mifflin Harcourt; 2011."
Penny-wise	"One who is good with only small sums or matters. From the phrase ""penny-wise and pound-foolish""."
malison \MAL-uh-sun\	"noun Curse, malediction. [""Malison"" is still hanging on after being around for eight centuries, but it appears to have suffered the curse of time. Though ""malison"" still sees occasional use, it is no longer as common as it was in days of yore. Rather, it has been largely supplanted by its younger cousin ""malediction."" ""Malison"" and ""malediction"" are both descendants of the Late Latin word ""maledictio,"" itself from ""maledicere,"" meaning ""to curse."" ""Maledicere"" in turn traces back to Latin ""male,"" meaning ""badly,"" and ""dicere,"" meaning ""to speak or say.""] ""To add insult to injury he preferred to launch a malison of hatred and execration...."" — From a letter by Raymond Ellis to the Belfast Telegraph, August 24, 2001"
blousy or blowsy or blowzy /BLOU-zee/	"adjective 1. Having a coarsely ruddy complexion. 2. Disheveled. [From English dialect blowze (wench). Earliest documented use: around 1770.] ""She appears transformed from the dowdy, blousy woman with big hair."" Hillary in the Oval Office; Irish Independent (Dublin); Mar 25, 2006."
mawkish \MAW-kish\	"adjective 1. Having a weak often unpleasant taste. 2. Marked by sickly sentimentality; sad or romantic in a foolish or exaggerated way. [The etymology of ""mawkish"" really opens up a can of worms—or, more properly, maggots. The ""mawk"" of ""mawkish"" derives from Middle English ""mawke,"" which means ""maggot."" ""Mawke,"" in its turn, developed from the Old Norse word ""mathkr,"" which had the same meaning as its descendant. Although ""mawkish"" literally means ""maggoty,"" since at least the 17th century English speakers have eschewed its decaying carcass implications and used it figuratively instead. As one language writer put it, ""Time has treated 'mawkish' gently: the wormy stench and corruption of its primal state were forgotten and 'mawkish' became sickly in a weak sort of way instead of repulsive and revolting.""] ""Although [the Bee Gees] harmonized beautifully, they had none of the Fab Four's cheekiness or verbal cleverness. In contrast to the Beatles, their ballad-heavy music was often mawkish."" — From Alice Echols' 2011 book Hot Stuff: Disco and the Remaking of American Culture"
uxorious \ək-ˈsȯr-ē-əs, ˌəg-ˈzȯr-\	"adjective Excessively fond of or submissive to a wife. [From Latin uxor (wife). The feminine counterpart of this word is maritorious. Earliest documented use: 1598.] ""Mostly, though, Harold Pinter is uxorious -- showering his wife with flowers, poems, jewellery, and impeccably chosen books. It is rare to read of a modern marriage maturing into such singular devotion."" - Anne Kingston; Books; Maclean's (Toronto, Canada); Nov 15, 2010."
obambulate /o-BAM-byuh-layt/	"verb intr. To walk about. [From Latin ob- (to) + ambulare (to walk). Earliest documented use: 1614.] ""We have often seen noble statesmen obambulating (as Dr. Johnson would say) the silent engraving-room, obviously rehearsing their orations."" The Year's Art; J.S. Virtue & Co.; 1917."
sequacious \sih-KWAY-shus\	"adjective Intellectually servile. [""Sequacious"" is formed from the Latin ""sequac-,"" or ""sequax"" (which means ""inclined to follow"" and comes from ""sequi,"" ""to follow"") and the English ""-ious."" The original and now archaic meaning of ""sequacious"" was ""inclined to follow"" or ""subservient."" Although that meaning might as easily describe someone who willingly dropped into line behind a war leader, or who was unusually compliant or obedient in any sense, the concept gradually narrowed into the image of someone who blindly adopts ideas without much thought. Labeling a person ""sequacious"" is not very complimentary, and implies a slavish willingness to adopt a thought or opinion.] ""Fund investors are not simply sequacious followers of yield, but are also responding to the federal government's actions to stabilize the macro-economic environment."" — From an article by Matthew Sheahan in High Yield Report, January 12, 2009"
maieutic \may-YOO-tik\	"adjective Relating to or resembling the Socratic method of eliciting new ideas from another. [""Maieutic"" comes from ""maieutikos,"" the Greek word for ""of midwifery."" In one of Plato's ""Dialogues,"" Socrates applies ""maieutikos"" to his method of bringing forth new ideas by reasoning and dialogue; he thought the technique analogous to those a midwife uses in delivering a baby (Socrates' mother was a midwife). A teacher who uses maieutic methods can be thought of as an intellectual midwife who assists students in bringing forth ideas and conceptions previously latent in their minds.] ""I am grateful to him for his maieutic inquiry about my own views, which had not crystallized."" — From an article by William F. Buckley, Jr., in the Pittsburgh Post-Gazette, December 27, 1973"
vegete /vuh-JEET/	"adjective Lively; active; vigorous. [From Latin vegere (to enliven). Ultimately from the Indo-European root weg- (to be strong or lively), which also gave us vigor, velocity, and vegetable. Earliest documented use: 1639.] ""I love to be my own master, when my spirits are prompt, when my brain is vegete and apt for thought."" Ralph Waldo Emerson's Journal; Jul 10, 1828."
emulous /EM-yuh-luhs/	"adjective 1. Eager to imitate, equal, or to surpass another. 2. Jealous or envious. [From Latin aemulus. Ultimately from the Indo-European root aim- (copy), which also gave us emulate, imitate, image, and imagine. Earliest documented use: 1398.] ""This show feels assembled by an emulous shopaholic who looked around at the tourist-drawing hits of the last decade and said: 'I want some of that. And that. Ooh, and can I have that, too?'"" - Ben Brantley; Sisterhood vs. Boss; The New York Times; May 1, 2009."
cautelous /KOT-uh-luhs/	"adjective 1. Cautious. 2. Crafty. [From French cauteleux (cunning). Earliest documented use: 1384.] ""Boeotian and cautelous people should not read this ad! You're reading on? Great! You're obviously bright, adventurous, and game enough for Belvoir St Theatre."" The Sydney Morning Herald (Australia); Feb 25, 1987."
Boeotian /bee-O-shuhn/	"adjective1. Of or relating to Boeotia or its citizens.2. Dull; boorish. noun1. A native of Boeotia.2. A person who is dull or lacking in culture. [From Boeotia, a district in ancient Greece, noted for its thick air and the proverbial dullness of its people.] ""She confides, 'I know the importance of symbolism and the value of making the right gestures'--a rare truth in this repetitive, fuddled, Boeotian and dispiriting autobiography."" - H. Aram Veeser; Addicted to Privilege; The Nation (New York); Sep 30; 1996."
Jericho /JER-i-ko/	"noun A place out of the way; an unspecified place; a place of concealment. Often used in the phrase ""go to Jericho"". [After Jericho, an ancient city of Palestine, northwest of the Dead Sea, where David had his servants wait until their beards had grown. As in Samuel, a book of the Bible, ""And the king said, Tarry at Jericho until your beards be grown.""] ""The best advice as you worry whether your mail lottery envelope will end up in Jacobs Field or shipped by mistake to Jericho is to savor every anxious moment of this season."" Bud Shaw; No Tribe Season Will Match This; The Plain Dealer (Cleveland, Ohio); Sep 21, 1995."
pertinacious \per-tuh-NAY-shus\	"adjective 1. a) Adhering resolutely to an opinion, purpose, or design. b) Perversely persistent. 2. Stubbornly tenacious. [If you say ""pertinacious"" out loud, it might sound familiar. That may be because if you take away the word's first syllable, you're left with something very similar to the word ""tenacious,"" which means ""tending to adhere or cling."" The similarity between ""pertinacious"" and ""tenacious"" isn't mere coincidence; both words derive from ""tenax,"" the Latin word for ""tenacious,"" and ultimately from the verb ""tenēre,"" meaning ""to hold."" Another descendant of ""tenēre"" is ""tenure,"" a word that is typically used of the right to hold a job (especially a teaching position) for as long as desired.] ""The 22-year-old paraplegic hasn't let his life-changing accident slow him down. He has branched out to new sports and even continues to snowmobile. He is pertinacious."" — From an article by Tom Patrick in Yukon News, August 31, 2012"
tartar \TAHR-ter\	"noun 1. often capitalized A person of irritable or violent temper. 2. One that proves to be unexpectedly formidable. [Originally, their name was ""Tatar,"" not ""Tartar."" Since at least the 1200s, the Tatar people have lived in Asia and Eastern Europe, and they were among the fiercest fighters of the Golden Horde of the Mongols. In the 13th century, they rode with Genghis Khan and became the terror of their day. Their name, ""Tatar,"" is believed to come from Persian or a Turkic language, but in Europe it was associated with ""Tartarus,"" the Latin name for the part of Hell reserved for the punishment of the wicked. Because of that association, English speakers began calling the Tatar people ""Tartars."" Over time, ""tartar"" came to be used for anyone considered as ferocious or violent as the Tartar warriors who had once ransacked the ancient world.] ""Strange that one whom I have described hitherto as so timid and easily put upon should prove such a Tartar all of a sudden on the day of his marriage."" — From Samuel Butler's 1903 autobiographical novel The Way of All Flesh"
mithridatism /MITH-ri-day-tiz-uhm/	"noun The developing of immunity to a poison by taking gradually increasing doses of it. [After Mithridates VI, king of Pontus (now in Turkey) 120-63 BCE, who is said to have acquired immunity to poison by ingesting gradually larger doses of it. Earliest documented use: 1851. Mithridates VI's father was poisoned. No wonder VI wanted to develop tolerance to poison. The story goes that after VI's defeat by Pompey, he didn't want to be captured alive. So he tried to end his life by taking poison. That didn't work, so he had a servant stab him with a sword.] ""Some monks resorted to the direct ingestion of mercury and cinnabar, small quantities at first, but gradually building up the dosage as the body's tolerance increased -- an alchemical mithridatism."" Alexander Goldstein; The Foundling; Trafford Publishing; 2009."
kaffeeklatsch /KAH-fee-klach/	"noun An informal social gathering for coffee and conversation. [From German Kaffeeklatsch, from Kaffee (coffee) + Klatsch (gossip). Earliest documented use: 1888. The word has many spelling variants: kaffeeklatch, kaffee klatch, kaffee klatsch, coffeeklatsch, coffeeklatch, coffee klatsch, coffee klatch.] ""I can always count on my monthly kaffeeklatsches with my fellow scribes to surface the news items that really matter."" - Ruth Walker; The Real Regular and the New Normal; The Christian Science Monitor (Boston, Massachusetts); Jun 8, 2010."
succedaneum /suk-si-DAY-nee-uhm/	"noun A substitute. [From Latin succedere (to succeed), from suc- (a variant of sub-, used before c) and cedere (to go). Ultimately from Indo-European root ked- (to go or yield) that's also the ancestor of exceed, secede, proceed, cease, and necessary.] ""Sharon's idea of a peace process is a succedaneum for war process."" Road Map or Road Rage?; United Press International; May 19, 2003."	
margaritaceous /mar-guhr-i-TAY-shuhs/	"adjective Pearly. [From Latin margarita, from Greek margarites (pearl). Margarita, the tequila cocktail, is named after Margarita, the Spanish form of the name Margaret, meaning pearl. Who this woman was isn't certain. Perhaps this offers an opportunity to extend the meaning of the word margaritaceous after the drink.] ""The mesial band has something of a margaritaceous sheen, but it is very slight and dull."" Charles James Stewart Bethune, et al; The Canadian Entomologist; 1868."	
proceleusmatic /pros-uh-loos-MAT-ik/	"adjective Inciting, exhorting, or inspiring. noun A metrical foot of four short syllables. [From Late Latin proceleusmaticus, from Greek prokeleusmatikos (calling for incitement), from keleuein (to rouse to action).] ""The ancient proceleusmatic song by which the rowers of galleys were animated may be supposed to have been of this kind."" Samuel Johnson; A Journey to the Western Island of Scotland; 1775."	
balsamic /bal-SAM-ik/	"adjective 1. Fragrant. 2. Soothing or healing. 3. Relating to balsam. [From Latin balsamum, from Greek balsamon. Balsam is any of several aromatic plant resins. Balsamic vinegar, named for its supposed health-giving properties, is a dark, sweet and sour vinegar traditionally made in the Modena region in Italy. It's made from white grapes and matured in wooden casks over several years.] ""Bussing my body with soft balsamic busses..."" Walt Whitman; Leaves of Grass; 1900."	
procellous /pro-SEL-uhs/	"adjective Stormy, as the sea. [From Latin procellosus (stormy), from procella (storm).] ""I likened myself to a sailor ... to brave the dangers of that procellous sea."" Rafael Sabatini; The Strolling Saint; Stanley Paul; 1913."	
aphotic /ay-FO-tik/	"adjective Lightless, especially without sunlight. [From Greek a- (not) + phot- (light). Ultimately from Indo-European root bha- (to shine) that's also the source of beacon, beckon, phantom, phenomenon, and phosphorous.] ""In fact, Larry's craven musings and jaundiced view of the world is so aphotic, Jerry, George, Elaine and Kramer seem like cheery philanthropists."" Vinay Menon; Think Seinfeld Only Darker; The Toronto Star (Canada); Feb 12, 2003."	
sederunt \suh-DEER-unt\	"noun A prolonged sitting (as for discussion). [""Sederunt"" was summonsed by members of the Scottish Court of Session and other deliberative bodies during the 17th century to refer to the list of people present at meetings and to the ""sittings"" themselves. The word sat in deliberation for some time before being called upon by the general public as a word for any prolonged sitting, whether for relaxation, reading, casual discussion, or the like. ""Sederunt"" proved to be the right choice because it derives from Latin ""sedēre,"" meaning ""to sit.""] ""A proposed schedule was passed, whereby (among other things) informal, job fair-style briefing groups will be held on Sunday afternoon, Monday morning will be devoted to an orientation for the entire assembly, and a regular business sederunt will commence Monday afternoon."" — From an article in the Presbyterian Record, January 1, 2012"	
cathexis \kuh-THEK-sis\	"noun Investment of mental or emotional energy in a person, object, or idea. [You might suspect that ""cathexis"" derives from a word for ""emotion,"" but in actuality the key concept is ""holding."" ""Cathexis"" comes to us by way of New Latin (Latin as used after the medieval period in scientific description or classification) from the Greek word ""kathexis,"" meaning ""holding."" It can ultimately be traced back (through ""katechein,"" meaning ""to hold fast, occupy"") to the Greek verb ""echein,"" meaning ""to have"" or ""to hold."" ""Cathexis"" first appeared in print in 1922 in a book about Freud's psychological theories (which also established the plural as ""cathexes,"" as is consistent with Latin), and it is still often used in scientific and specifically psychological contexts.] ""The plot of this French film diverges from … most American film we are force-fed in that it deals powerfully with subject matter that counts. It treats an almost unrecognized aspect of WWII in Europe, eliciting a strong cathexis from the viewer, who learns so much that he never knew before this celluloid feast."" — From an article by Marion DS Dreyfus in American Thinker, April 8, 2012"	
campestral \kam-PESS-trul\	"adjective Of or relating to fields or open country; rural. [Scamper across an open field, then, while catching your breath, ponder this: ""scamper"" and ""campestral"" both ultimately derive from the Latin noun ""campus,"" meaning ""field"" or ""plain."" Latin ""campester"" is the adjective that means ""pertaining to a campus."" In ancient Rome, a campus was a place for games, athletic practice, and military drills. ""Scamper"" probably started with a military association, as well (it is assumed to have evolved from the Latin verb ""excampare,"" meaning ""to decamp""). In English, ""campestral"" took on an exclusively rural aspect upon its introduction in the 18th century, while ""campus,"" you might say, became strictly academic.] ""Just about any amateur naturalist who pays attention to the birds, beasts, flowers and seasons in campestral Maine will find an eye-opener or two here."" — From a book review by Dana Wilde in the Bangor (Maine) Daily News, October 26, 2009"	
lachrymal /LAK-ruh-muhl/	"adjective Relating to or inducing tears. [From Latin lacrima (tear). Earliest documented use: 1541.] ""She wiped his tears with the edge of her garment, but that made him more lachrymal."" - Udai Rathor; Kojia, the Ugly; Strategic Book Publishing; 2012. Reminds me of lachrymose that, if I recall correctly, was one of the six stages of drunkenness. They are verbose, jocose, morose, lachrymose, bellicose, and comatose."	
bursiform /BUHR-suh-form/	"adjective Shaped like a pouch or a sac. [From Latin bursa (bag, pouch), from Greek byrsa (skin, hide). Earliest documented use: 1835.] ""Our results indicated that mononuclear cells ... developed a bursiform shape."" - Bone Research; Obesity, Fitness & Wellness Week; Jun 9, 2012."	
aperçu \ˌa-per-SUE\ plural aperçus	"noun 1. A brief summary or sketch; outline. 2. An clever insight. [French, from aperçu, past participle of apercevoir to perceive, from Old French aperceivre, from a- (from Latin ad-) + perceivre to perceive — more at perceive. First Known Use: 1828] ""A series of partial and more or less disparate aperçus or outlooks; each for itself a center of experience."" - James Ward."	
septentrional /sep-TEN-tree-uh-nuhl/	"adjective Northern. [From Latin septentriones, literally the seven ploughing oxen, a name for the seven stars of the Great Bear constellation that appears in the northern sky. From Latin septem (seven) + triones (ploughing oxen). Earliest documented use: around 1400.] ""Once the tourists have filtered back to their septentrional homes in Europe, the men of Spetsai [Greece] resume their norm of shooting birds."" C.L. Sulzberger; A Return Visit to Glistening Spetsai; The New York Times; Sep 28, 1986."	
connive \kuh-NYVE\	"verb 1. To pretend ignorance of or fail to take action against something one ought to oppose. 2. a) To be indulgent or in secret sympathy, wink. b) To cooperate secretly or have a secret understanding. 3. To engage in secret scheming; conspire. [""Connive"" may not seem like a troublesome term, but it was to Wilson Follett, a usage critic who lamented that the word ""was undone during the Second World War, when restless spirits felt the need of a new synonym for plotting, bribing, spying, conspiring, engineering a coup, preparing a secret attack."" Follett thought ""connive"" should only mean ""to wink at"" or ""to pretend ignorance."" Those senses are closer to the Latin ancestor of the word (""connive"" comes from the Latin ""connivēre,"" which means ""to close the eyes"" and which is descended from ""-nivēre,"" a form akin to the Latin verb ""nictare,"" meaning ""to wink""). But many English speakers disagreed, and the ""conspire"" sense is now the word's most widely used meaning.] ""Families fare badly in Western drama. Oedipus kills his father, Lear's daughters connive against one another, and Ibsen's Nora walks out on her husband and their three young children."" — From a theater review by Steven G. Kellman in Current (San Antonio), August 22–28, 2012"	
nobby \NAH-bee\	"adjective Cleverly stylish; chic, smart. [""Nobby"" comes from the noun ""nob,"" which is used in British English to mean ""one in a superior position in life."" (""Nob"" may have begun as a slang word for ""head,"" but etymologists aren't completely sure. A possible connection to ""noble"" has been suggested as well.) Appearing in English in 1788, ""nobby"" was first used to describe people of strikingly exquisite appearance. It has since extended in usage to describe the places frequented by such people, as well as their genteel customs. Charles Dickens, for example, wrote in Bleak House (1853) of ""[r]especting this unfortunate family matter, and the nobbiest way of keeping it quiet.""] ""This 'Members Only' club was where Chicago's nobbiest [people] gathered to shut out people who were not like them in order to lead the good life of golf, horses, bathing on a private beach, and social events."" — From an article by Henry Kisor in the Chicago Sun-Times, November 4, 2001"	
hypermnesia \hye-perm-NEE-zhee-uh\	"noun Abnormally vivid or complete memory or recall of the past. [Perhaps the most famous individual to exhibit hypermnesia was a Russian man known as ""S,"" whose amazing photographic memory was studied for 30 years by a psychologist in the early part of the 20th century. ""Hypermnesia"" sometimes refers to cases like that of ""S,"" but it can also refer to specific instances of heightened memory (such as those brought on by trauma or hypnosis) experienced by people whose memory abilities are unremarkable under ordinary circumstances. The word ""hypermnesia,"" which has been with us since at least 1882, was created in New Latin as the combination of ""hyper-"" (meaning ""beyond"" or ""super"") and ""-mnesia"" (patterned after ""amnesia""). It ultimately derives from the Greek word ""mnasthai,"" meaning ""to remember.""] ""'Funes, His Memory' tells the evocative tale of Ireneo Funes, a Uruguayan boy who suffers an accident that leaves him immobilized along with an acute form of hypermnesia, a mental abnormality expressed in exceptionally precise memory."" — From John Brockman's 2011 book Is the Internet Changing the Way You Think?"	
columbine /kol-uh m-bahyn, -bin/	adjective 1. Of a dove. 2. Dovelike; dove-colored. [1350–1400; Middle English < Latin columbīnus, equivalent to columb ( a ) dove + -īnus -ine1	
tutelary \TOO-tuh-lair-ee\	"adjective 1. Having the guardianship of a person or a thing. 2. Of or relating to a guardian. [""Tutelary"" derives from the Latin noun ""tutelarius,"" meaning ""guardian."" ""Tutelarius,"" in turn, was formed by combining the word ""tutela"" (""protection"" or ""guardian"") and ""-arius,"" a suffix that implies belonging and connection. A more familiar descendant of ""tutela"" in English might be ""tutelage,"" which initially described an act or process of serving as a guardian or protector but has also come to refer to teaching or influence. If you suspect that ""tutor"" is also related, you are correct. ""Tutelary"" can also be a noun referring to a power (such as a deity) who acts as a guardian.] The ancient Romans revered certain gods and goddesses as tutelary deities."	
adumbrate \A-dem-brate\	"transitive verb 1. To foreshadow vaguely; intimate. 2. To suggest, disclose, or outline partially. <adumbrate a plan> 3. Overshadow, obscure. [From Latin umbra (shade, shadow), which also gave us the words umbrella, umbrage, and somber. Earliest documented use: 1599.] ""Mr Cameron should adumbrate painful decisions; he should sketch out the principles that will inform them; but he should not be drawn into spelling out what exactly they will be."" - Coming Clean; The Economist (London, UK); Mar 26, 2009. ""To create her three-dimensional composition, Robin Osler variedly manipulated floor and ceiling planes so as to adumbrate virtual spaces."" - Monica Geran; Shadow Play; Interior Design (New York); Apr 2000. ""And I enjoyed seeing my laborious joke cleverly adumbrated in yet another of your witty, wide-ranging, and inexhaustibly erudite columns."" - Paul Theroux"	
droll /drōl/	Adjective Amusing in an odd way. His dignified presence decorated our droll little quarters - Gwendolyn Brooks	
meridional /mer-RID-e-on'l/	adjective 1. Located in the south, southern; later especially, pertaining to the south of France or other southern parts of Europe. 2. (astronomy, geography) Along a north-south direction, or relative to a meridian; or relating to meridians or a meridian. 3. Of or characteristic of southern areas or people, especially those in the south of France or other southern parts of Europe. noun 1. An inhabitant of a southern region, especially the south of France. As an old navigator, I enjoy studying ancient charts and atlases, and the words septentrional and meridional are familiar terms for North and South, respectively. Septentrional, refers to the seven stars of what is known, in North America, as the Big Dipper. The Big Dipper is also known as Ursa Major, Latin for Great Bear. The Greek word for bear is arktos (adjective: arktikos) from which we get Arctic. The opposite of arktikos would be anti-arktikos, or Antarctic. The word meridian comes from Latin meridies -- the middle of the day. The middle of the day is determined by watching the sun rise from the east. When it reaches its highest point, just before it begins to set, that is midday or local noon. Most of the navigators and astronomers viewed this moment by looking south, since they were viewing the sun form the northern hemisphere.	
xerophyte /ZEER-uh-fyt/	"noun A plant adapted to growing in a very dry or desert environment. [From Greek xero- (dry) + phyton (plant). Earliest documented use: 1897.] ""Saavik's bemused comment when Captain Howe, her former first officer, had sent her a 'get well cactus' was that on Vulcan it was a superfluous xerophyte."" Keith R.A. DeCandido; Star Trek: Tales of the Dominion War; Simon & Schuster; 2004."	
whippersnapper /HWIP-uhr-snap-uhr, WIP-/	"noun A person regarded as unimportant and presumptuous, especially someone young. [Perhaps an alteration of whipsnapper, representing noise and uselessness, or an alteration of snippersnapper, similar in sense. Earliest documented use: 1674.] ""Young high-flyers find it hard to manage older workers, and older curmudgeons resent being bossed about by whippersnappers."" Age Shall Not Wither Them; The Economist (London, UK); Apr 7, 2011."	
princox /PRIN-koks/	"noun A conceited person; a coxcomb. Also princock. [Of uncertain origin. Earliest documented use: 1540.] ""The crowing princock wouldn't mind his tongue, practically begged for a beating with his back talk."" Jennifer Bray-Weber; A Kiss in the Wind; Harlequin; 2012. ""You are a saucy boy ... You are a princox."" William Shakespeare; Romeo & Juliet; 1590s."	
conversazione /kon-vuhr-sayt-see-O-nee, kahn-, -nay/	"noun A formal gathering for conversation, especially on arts, literature, etc. [From Italian conversazione (conversation), from Latin conversari (to associate with). Ultimately from the Indo-European root wer- (to turn or bend), also the source of wring, weird, writhe, worth, revert, universe, verso, versicolor, and animadvert. Earliest documented use: 1740.] ""We must invite them to our conversazione."" - Amanda Grange; Mr. Darcy, Vampyre; Sourcebooks; 2009."	
cumshaw /KUM-shaw/	"noun A gift or a tip. [From Chinese (Amoy/Xiamen dialect), kan (to be grateful) + hsieh (thanks). The term was used by beggars in Chinese ports and picked up by visiting sailors during the 19th century. Earliest documented use: 1839.] ""All those extra bodies don't necessarily increase the chances for cumshaw, according to some tip recipients."" Sean M. Wood; Tourism Doesn't Fill Their Tip Jar; San Antonio Express-News (Texas); Apr 7, 2006."	
nudiustertian /noo-dee-uhs-TUR-shuhn, nyoo-/	"adjective Of or relating to the day before yesterday. [From Latin nudius tertius, literally, today is the third day. Earliest documented use: 1647. Also see hesternal (relating to yesterday) hodiernal (relating to today).] ""I'd ordered the key on-line for £48 that nudiustertian morning and was not expecting it to arrive until the following week."" - Benjamin Nolan; Cyclin' the City; Syniq.co.uk; Aug 22, 2012."	
overween /oh-ver-WEEN/	"verb Archaic. To be conceited or arrogant. ""While I share the general European aversion to the overweening US firearms lobby, gun ownership has two compelling arguments on its side."" - The Independent, 18 Dec. 2012."	
aurorean /o-ROR-ee-uhn, o-ROHR-/	"adjective Of or belonging to the dawn. [From Latin aurora (dawn, goddess of the dawn). Earliest documented use: 1820.] ""The moon shone resplendently above us -- its splendid aureola seemed suffused with stolen aurorean light."" - Pietros Maneos; The Italian Pleasures of Gabriele Paterkallos; Aesthete Press; 2012."	
cenobite /SEN-uh-byt, SEEN-/	"noun A member of a religious order living in a monastic community. (Also see eremite and anchorite.) [From Latin coenobium (monastery), from Greek koinobion (convent), from koinos (common) + bios (life). Earliest documented use: before 1638.] ""He knew a fellow cenobite when he saw one. There was no religious meditation involved, but they were both alone in places where they should not have been alone."" - Elizabeth George; Careless in Red; Harper; 2009."	
molon labe (mo-lone lah-veh) ΜΟΛΩΝ ΛΑΒΕ	"The phrase molon labe means ""Come and take"". It is a classical expression of defiance reportedly spoken by King Leonidas I in response to the Persian army's demand that the Spartans surrender their weapons at the Battle of Thermopylae. It is an exemplary use of a laconic phrase."	
Xanthippe or Xantippe /zan-THIP-ee, -TIP-/	"noun A nagging, ill-tempered woman. [After Xanthippe, wife of Socrates (c. 5 BCE) who has been portrayed as a nagging, quarrelsome woman. The name Xanthippe is from xanthos (yellow) + hippos (horse). Also see xanthodontous. Earliest documented use: 1691. Socrates is said to have advised, ""By all means marry; if you get a good wife, you'll be happy. If you get a bad one, you'll become a philosopher."" It's not known what Socrates thought would happen if the roles were reversed. Also, there's the question of which came first: philosophizing or being ill-tempered. Would being married to a philosopher turn a woman into a shrew?] Mistress Foster is a grasping shrew, a Xanthippe, who bosses her husband about."" - Jean Howard; Theater of a City: The Places of London Comedy; University of Pennsylvania Press; 2009."	
implacable /im-PLAK-uh-buhl, -PLAY-kuh-/	"adjective Impossible to pacify or appease. [From Latin placare (to quiet or appease). Ultimately from the Indo-European root plak- (to be flat), which is also the source of fluke, flake, flaw, plead, please, supple, supplicatory, and archipelago. Earliest documented use: 1522.] ""Big issues that pit a single, powerless individual against a vast, implacable adversary have inspired some of his most memorable novels."" - Bill Sheehan; Grisham's Latest; The Washington Post; Oct 23, 2012."	
impetuous /im-PECH-oo-uhs/	"adjective Marked by impulsiveness or impatience. [From Latin impetus (assault, impetus), from impetere (to attack), from in- (in) + petere (to go to). Ultimately from the Indo-European root pet- (to rush or fly), which also gave us feather, petition, compete, perpetual, pterodactyl, helicopter, propitious, pinnate, and lepidopterology (study of butterflies and moths). Earliest documented use: 1398.] ""Fools rush in ... Taylor Swift often acts, well, like an impetuous teen straight out of one of her songs."" Eric Andersson; Why Taylor Can't Find Love; Us Weekly (New York); Nov 19, 2012."	
paresthesia or paraesthesia /par-uhs-THEE-zhuh, -zhee-/	"noun A sensation of pricking, tingling, burning, etc. on the skin. [From Greek para- (at, beyond) + aisthesis (sensation or perception). Ultimately from the Indo-European root au- (to perceive) that also gave us audio, audience, audit, auditorium, anesthesia, aesthetic, anesthetic, esthesia, synesthesia, and obey. Earliest documented use: 1848.] ""Cronk muttered to himself, wiggling his right foot in an effort to relieve the paresthesia."" - Bruce Banta; A Dead Man's Chest; Xlibris; 2011."	
filipendulous /fi-li-PEN-juh-luhs, -PEN-dyoo-/	"adjective Hanging by a thread. [From Latin filum (thread) + pendere (to hang). Ultimately from the Indo-European root (s)pen- (to draw, to spin), which is also the source of pendulum, spider, pound, pansy, pendant, ponder, appendix, penthouse, depend, and spontaneous. Earliest documented use: 1864.] ""A group of filipendulous constructions that evoke Brobdingnagian hornets' nests."" The New Yorker; Sep 25, 1989."	
chuffed /chuft/	adjective Pleased; satisfied. [From English dialect chuff (pleased, puffed, swollen with pride).] Displeased; annoyed. [From chuff (boor, churl), from Middle English chuffe.] He was really chuffed about the fire as well, because Mrs Pearson from up the stairs had her washing ruined by the smoke. - Irvine Welsh, Marabou Stork Nightmares, 1997 Well, we can discuss that when we get there. Declan will be chuffed when I tell him, the family never usually goes to these things. - Cecelia Ahern, P.S. I Love You, 2007	
fetter /fet-er/	noun 1. A chain or shackle placed on the feet. 2. Usually, fetters. Anything that confines or restrains: Boredom puts fetters upon the imagination. verb (used with object) 3. To put fetters upon. 4. To confine; restrain. [before 900; Middle English, Old English feter; cognate with Old High German fezzera, Old Norse fjǫturr; akin to foot]	
impudent /IM-pyuh-duhnt/	"adjective Marked by offensive boldness. [From Latin im- (not) + pudere (to make or be ashamed) which also gave us pudibund (prudish), pudency (modesty), and pudeur (a sense of shame). Earliest documented use: 1386.] ""The tie has matching socks and braces ... It seems imprudent (and possibly impudent) to ask if his boxers match, as well."" - Mike Amos; Laughing Matter; Northern Echo (Darlington, UK); Mar 5, 2011."	
hent \hent\	"verb To seize. [Hent, an ancient word, entered Old English before the year 1000 as a relative of the verbs hentan ""to pursue"" and huntian ""to hunt.""] ""Then he hent in hand two stones and went round about the city…"" - Lady Isabel Burton, Justin Huntly McCarthy, Lady Burton's Edition of Her Husband's Arabian Nights ""So they hent him by the hand and thrust him out; and I took the lute and sang over again the songs of my own composing which the damsel had sung."" - Emile Van Vliet, The Thousand Nights and A Night"	
proscribe /pro-SKRYB/	"verb tr. 1. To forbid something, especially by law. 2. To denounce, condemn, or exile someone. [From Latin proscribere (to publish in writing, to name someone as outlawed), from pro- (front) + scribere (write).] ""Tremendous pressure is being brought on the government by some political parties and organizations to proscribe the LTTE for its atrocities."" Heingo; Ramifications of Banning Political Parties and Organisations; Sri Lanka Daily Mirror (Colombo); Dec 16, 2006."	
prepossessing /pree-puh-ZES-ing/	"adjective Creating a favorable impression; attractive. [From pre- + possess, from Latin possidere (to occupy, dominate, seize), from potis (able) + sedere (to sit).] ""A prepossessing performer with a beautiful baritone, Murray is tall, blond and Midwestern-looking."" F. Kathleen Foley; Not Quite the Last Word on Irving Berlin; The Los Angeles Times; Jun 27, 2005."	
profligate /PROF-li-git, -gayt/	"adjective 1. Recklessly extravagant; wasteful. 2. Given over to dissipation; dissolute. noun A profligate person. [From Latin profligatus, past participle of profligare (to strike down, to ruin), from pro- (forth, down) + fligere (to strike).] ""Despite Bank Markazi's tsunami of petrodollars, the IMF has warned that profligate state spending spells future budget deficits."" Matein Khalid; Iran: Sanctions, Geopolitics and the Economy; Khaleej Times (Dubai, United Arab Emirates); Jan 7, 2007."	
pignus /PIG-nuhs/ plural pignora	"noun 1. A pledge. 2. Something held as security for a debt. [From Latin pignus (pledge).] ""I hear a threat?"" ""You hear a pignus of your committal. No more."" Anthony Burgess; A Dead Man in Deptford; Carroll & Graf; 1995."	
epigamic /ep-i-GAM-ik/	"adjective Of or relating to a trait or behavior that attracts a mate. [From Greek epigamos (marriageable), from epi- (upon) + gamos (marriage). Examples: In an animal, bright feathers or big antlers. In a human, a sports car or a big bust.] ""The change from the young, intellectual, epigamic Jays, to the more diplomatically sophisticated Hendersons also reflected a sharp change in Washington lifestyle."" - Peter D. Carr; It Occurred to Me; Trafford Publishing; 2006."	
pigsney /PIGZ-nee-/	"noun 1. A sweetheart. 2. An eye, especially a small one. [From Middle English piggesnye (pig's eye).] ""Piers lifted his head out of his nest again and asked, 'Was Ellis in a fight again? 'Hush, pigsney,' said Rose."" Margaret Frazer; The Servant's Tale; Berkeley Publishing; 1993."	
epigeal /ep-i-JEE-uhl/	"adjective Living close to the ground, as certain plants. [From Greek epigeios (on the earth), from epi (upon) + ge (earth).] ""This nation must not let Denzil Douglas and his incompetent, all-good-for-themselves ministers bring us, a once successful and progressive people, to an epigeal existence."" - Charles Warne; Energy-saving Bulbs or A Nation-saving Government; Democrat (St. Kitts and Nevis); Jan 27, 2007."	
misology /mi-SOL-uh-jee/	"noun Hatred of logic or reason. [From Greek miso- (hate) + -logy (science, study).] ""Fletcher laughed. 'Your coyness smacks of misology. Sinking back down to that dark place within yourself, the one that you tried so desperately to suffocate.'"" - Chris Mooney; Deviant Ways; Atria; 2000."	
mainour \MEY-ner\	"noun A stolen article found on the person of or near the thief: to be taken with the mainour. ""Caught the thief, with the mainour, hey?"" -- Maria Edgeworth, The Parent's Assistant"	
gnathic /NATH-ik/	"adjective Of or relating to the jaw. [From Greek gnathos (jaw). Ultimately from the Indo-European root genu- (jawbone, chin), which is also the source of chin, prognathous , and Sanskrit hanu (jaw). Hanuman (literally, having a large jaw) was the name of a monkey god in Hindu mythology. Earliest documented use: 1882.] ""For the first time in his life Judah sees the strangeness of the khepri, hears the scissor-sounds their gnathic movements make."" - China Miéville; Iron Council; Del Rey; 2004."	
kinchin /kin-chin/	"noun A child. [Derived from the German kindchen, kinchin is a diminutive form of kind meaning ""child."" Kindchen entered the lexicon in the last decade of the 1600s.] ""He's naught but a kinchin, no bigger than a sparrow."" - Joan Aiken, The Whispering Mountain"	
quittance /KWIT-ns/	"noun 1. Recompense or requital. 2. Discharge from a debt or obligation. 3. A document certifying discharge from debt or obligation, as a receipt. [Quittance is derived from the Old French quit meaning ""free, clear."" The root did not take on its negative connotation, ""to give up,"" until the 1600s.] ""Very good; here is the money. Now make me out a quittance, signed."" - Edward Gilliat, John Standish, Or, The Harrowing of London"	
tensile \TEN-suhl\	"adjective 1. Capable of being stretched or drawn out; ductile. 2. Of or pertaining to tension: tensile strain. [This late Renaissance word tensile was derived in 1626 from the Latin verb tendere meaning ""to stretch.""] Claire's tensile features pull themselves tight with glee. - Zadie Smith, On Beauty One way of increasing the tensile strength in a wooden bow at any time of the year was to apply a sinew backing. - Louis Bird, Jennifer S. H. Brown, Anne Lindsay, Telling Our Stories"	
officious /o-FISH-uhs/	"adjective 1. Excessively eager in offering unwanted or unneeded advice or help. 2. Unofficial. [From Latin officiosus (dutiful), from officium (service).] ""It (the petition) demands that the traffic officials of Grahamstown `return to being polite public servants, working for the good and safety of the community, rather than the rude and officious revenue officers they have become...'"" - Cecile Greyling, Teacher Launches Petition Against Traffic Department Repression, East Cape News (Grahamstown, South Africa), June 13, 2002. ""The bough of cherries some officious fool Broke in the orchard for her, the white mule."" - Robert Browning, My Last Duchess, 1842."	
zakuska \zuh-KOOS-kuh\	"noun An hors d'oeuvre. ""Do you have anything for zakuska, Tractvanna?"" Oleg took stock of the table: boiled potatoes, bread, canned peas and sardines, a clove of garlic. -- Marina Sonkina, ""Tractorina's Travels,"" Lucia's Eyes and Other Stories I drink a shot, take a bite of marinated mushrooms in sour cream. Humankind has yet to invent any better zakuska. Even Nanny's half-sour pickles can't hold a candle to this. -- Vladimir Sorokin, Day of the Oprichnik"	
sprezzatura /spret-sah-TOOR-uh/	"noun Doing (or giving the appearance of doing) something effortlessly; effortless grace; nonchalance. [From Italian. Earliest documented use: 1957.] ""Norris is a man always in equipoise, a living illustration of the art of sprezzatura. No one has ever seen him ruffled."" - Hilary Mantel; Bring Up the Bodies; Henry Holt; 2012."	
homologous /huh-MOL-uh-guhs, hoh-/	"adjective 1. Exhibiting a degree of correspondence or similarity. 2. Corresponding in structure and evolutionary origin, but not necessarily in function. For example, human arm, dog foreleg, bird wing, and whale flipper are homologous. [From Greek homo- (same) + logos (word, proportion, reason). Earliest documented use: 1660.] ""Hobbes argues that the family constitutes a structure homologous to the state."" - Jean Bethke Elshtain; Sovereignty: God, State, and Self; Basic Books; 2008. ""The Guide seemed to make a sign by certain motions of his robe which may or may not have involved the lifting of an arm or some homologous member."" - HP Lovecraft; The Dreams in the Witch House and Other Weird Stories; Penguin; 2004."	
yare \yair\	"adjective 1. Easily maneuverable; nimble. 2. Ready; prepared. [From Old English gearo/gearu (ready). Earliest documented use: 888.] ""I do desire to learn, sir; and, I hope, if you have occasion to use me for your own turn, you shall find me yare.""- William Shakespeare; Measure For Measure; 1604. ""She was a 'bonnie lass' in the words of her chief engineer; she was faithful, she was yare -- an unlikely compliment for a vessel without sails."" - D.C. Riechel; German Departures; iUniverse; 2009."	
rialto \ree-AL-toh\	noun An exchange or mart. [Rialto comes from the name for the mercantile quarter of Venice during the middle ages. Shakespeare is thought to have brought the term into widespread usage from his play the Merchant of Venice, first performed at the turn of the seventeenth century. While it initially referred only to the specific marketplace in Venice, rialto soon took on a broader sense and could be applied marketplaces elsewhere.] We always did so in the same place, by a particular house, beyond the rialto in a steep-sloping backstreet of tenements, where advertisements turned in colours under the ivy. - China Miéville, Embassytown, 2011 I learn from Michael Lynch that courage of even the most spectacular nature isn't after all a spectacle, an arena with fixed sightlines, but instead a kind of floating permeable rialto of common lending, borrowing, extravagant indebtedness, and exchange. - Eve Kosofsky Sedgwick, Epistemology of the Closet, 1990 The following morning dawned clear and cool, and the chef decided to send me to the Rialto to buy pears and Gorgonzola. - Elle Newmark, The Chef's Apprentice, 2011	
strumpet /STRUHM-pit/	noun A prostitute; harlot. [1300–50; Middle English < ?]	
daven \DAH-vuhn\	"verb To pray. [Daven entered English in the mid-nineteenth century from Yiddish.] There, day or night, everyone — the men, the women, even the children — could daven nonstop. - Erica Lann-Clark, ""The Goats Know the Way,"" The Healing Heart, 2003 Every morning he wakes early to daven outside, facing Jerusalem. When I watch him from the window, I regret having taught him to sound out the Hebrew letters when he was only five. - Nicole Krauss, The History of Love"	
gaumless \GAWM-lis\	"adjective Lacking in vitality or intelligence; stupid, dull, or clumsy. [A variant spelling of gormless, gaumless first appeared in English in the mid-1700s from the now-outdated British term gome. When combined with the suffice -less the word literally means ""devoid of understanding.""] A little chuckle shook the Major, but he said regretfully: ""Nay, I'm too gaumless."" - Georgette Heyer, The Unknown Ajax, 1959 Gaumless, I reckon he was. When I saw I wasn't getting any of his gasper I left him there. - Jeremy Gavron, The Book of Israel, 2002"	
discursive /dis-KUHR-siv/	"adjective: 1. Jumping from topic to topic; rambling. 2. Proceeding logically, using reason or argument rather than emotion. [From Latin discurrere (to run about), from dis- (apart) + currere (to run). Ultimately from the Indo-European root kers- (to run), which is also the source of car, career, carpenter, occur, discharge, succor, and caricature. Earliest documented use: 1599.] ""The book is discursive, gently meandering down the River Thames."" Three Men In A Boat; Northern Echo (Darlington, UK); Sep 20, 2012. ""Obama's penchant for discursive explanations has bothered no constituency more than his base, whose members see in his sometimes professorial tone a lack of passion for the cause at hand."" - Scott Wilson; In Arguing for Firearms Restrictions, Obama Points to Constitution; The Washington Post; Jan 17, 2013."	
codicil \KOD-uh-suhl\	"noun 1. Any supplement; appendix. 2. A supplement to a will, containing an addition, explanation, modification, etc., of something in the will. [Codicil, which entered English in the late 1400s, shares a root with code. Both are derived from the same Latin root, codex meaning ""book of laws.""] ""If there were any rumours flying about later, about this Will or codicil, she might have thought that that was what she'd read in this rather undecipherable handwriting."" ""A genuine document,"" said Poirot. ""But there was also a forged codicil."" - Agatha Christie, Hallowe'en Party, 1969 ...so all that's got to be done is for you to draw up your will complete with codicil so it can't be re-sinned, and let's get under way to stop Sefior Carrasco's heart from breaking. - Miguel de Cervantes, Don Quixote, 1605"	
malapert /MAL-uh-puhrt/	"adjective Boldly disrespectful. [From Old French mal- (bad, wrong) + apert (bold, insolent, clever), from Latin apertus (open). Ultimately from the Indo-European root wer- (to cover), which also gave us overt, cover, warranty, warren, garage, garret, garment, garrison, garnish, guarantee, and pert. Earliest documented use: 1400.] ""Malapert and cheeky, she gazed up at him."" - Susan Johnson; Wicked; Bantam Books; 1996."	
mens rea /MENZ REE-uh/	"noun Criminal intent. [From Latin mens rea (guilty mind). Earliest documented use: 1861.] ""She appealed against her conviction on the basis that she did not have the required mens rea, in that she was not aware she was carrying drugs."" - Minimum 10-Year Drug Term Reduced for 'Naive' Offender; Irish Times (Dublin); Jan 16, 2012."	
soigné \swahn-YEY; Fr. swa-NYEY\	"adjective 1. Carefully or elegantly done, operated, or designed. 2. Well-groomed; dressed with great care and elegance. [Not surprisingly, ""soigné"" comes from French, where it serves as the past participle of the verb ""soigner,"" meaning ""to take care of."" It first appeared in English in the 19th century and can be used to describe such things as an elegant wardrobe, a fancy restaurant, or the extravagant meal one might enjoy at such a restaurant. It can also be used to describe people, as in a recent article on fashion designer Donna Karan: ""Though her name is really pronounced 'Karen,' people said it with a glamorous continental inflection; it suited their image of a fashion designer: aloof, soigne, different from you and me."" (Josh Patner, The New York Times, April 11, 2004)] I saw...books being borrowed from the library by gentlemen of soigné appearance. - W.G. Sebald, Austerlitz, 2001 A moment later the lights dimmed, the orchestra struck up the prelude and the curtain slid smoothly up. Later, during the intermission, Hearn took a cup of hot chocolate and mingled with the soigné crowd. - Eric Van Lustbader, The Bourne Legacy, 2010"	
imprest \IM-prest\	"noun An advance of money; loan. By law the whole of the seafaring population of Britain was liable to serve the King at sea, and if a man was given an ""imprest"" or advance payment by a King's agent — ""taking the King's shilling"" — he had to serve. - Dudley Pope, Decision at Trafalgar, 1999 Off you go, see the foreign editor, get an imprest—don't imagine you can squander money on this trip, though! - Eileen Arnot Robertson, Justice of the Heart, 1958"	
fillip /FIL-ip/	"noun 1. A stimulus. 2. A snap made by pressing a fingertip against the thumb and suddenly releasing it. verb tr. 1. To stimulate or to incite to action. 2. To make a snap by a fingertip against the thumb. [Apparently of onomatopoeic origin. Earliest documented use: 1530.] ""Intel splashed out $884 million ... to give its efforts in the embedded-chip market a fillip."" - Space Invaders; The Economist (London, UK); Jan 7, 2012."	
banausic /buh-NAW-sik, -zik/	"adjective Mechanical, utilitarian or routine, as opposed to inspiring or imaginative. [From Greek banausikos, from banausos (mechanic).] ""It will leave Beagle 2 to its banausic task of probing and burrowing into the surface of the Red Planet in its futile search for microbes and soda water."" - Peter Simple; Rogue Elements; The Daily Telegraph (London, UK); Jun 6, 2003."	
equivocate /i-KWIV-uh-kayt/	"verb intr. To be vague or ambiguous, especially in order to mislead. [From Latin aequi-/equi- (equal) + vocare (to call), from vox (voice). Earliest documented use: 1590.] ""The bishop equivocates and wrings his fat hands and procrastinates."" - Susan Wiggs; At the Queen's Summons; Harlequin; 2012."	
preterition \pret-uh-RISH-uhn\	"noun 1. The act of passing by or over; omission; disregard. 2. Calvinistic Theology. The passing over by God of those not elected to salvation or eternal life. 3. Rhetoric. Paralipsis. [From the Latin stem praeterit- meaning ""to go past,"" preterition first entered English at the turn of the sixteenth century. While the rhetorical and theological senses were present from the beginning, it took another 100 years for the legal sense to arise in the English language.] He had no innate sense of tragedy or preterition or complex binds or any of the things that made human beings' misfortunes significant to one another. - David Foster Wallace, Oblivion, 2004 I am a liar (by preterition), not an actor. - Roland Barthes, A Lover's Discourse, 1977"	
palatine /PAL-uh-tyn, -teen/	"adjective 1. Of or relating to a palace. 2. Of or relating to a palate. [For 1: After Palatine, from Latin Palatium, the name of the centermost of the seven hills on which ancient Rome was built. Roman emperors built their palaces on this hill. The word palace also derives from the same source. Earliest documented use: 1436. For 2: From French palatin, from Latin palatum palate (roof of the mouth). Earliest documented use: 1656] ""The palatine city Qal'a Bani Hammad in Algeria had terraced gardens and, in one of its palaces, an enormous rectangular pool."" - D. Fairchild Ruggles; Islamic Gardens and Landscapes; University of Pennsylvania Press; 2008. ""The teeth, tongue, palate, and gum are subjected to a direct painful influence -- that is, direct pain which acts upon the minor palatine nerve."" - Aleksandr Nevzorov; The Horse Crucified and Risen; Nevzorov Haute Ecole; 2011."	
battology \buh-TOL-uh-jee\	"noun Wearisome repetition of words in speaking or writing. [Battology entered English in the late 1500s from the Greek word battologia meaning ""speaking stammeringly"" from battos meaning ""stammerer"" and -logia meaning ""one who speaks (in a certain manner).""] They weren't political or surrealist, they weren't witty or comic. They were only the monotonous evidence of a civic battology. - George Friel, Mr Alfred M.A., 1972 I kept volleying this along the walls of my skull, aspiring by battology to battle. - Tibor Fischer, The Thought Gang, 1994"	
trachle \TRAH-khuh\	noun 1. An exhausting effort, especially walking or working. 2. An exhausted or bedraggled person. verb 1. To fatigue; tire; wear out. 2. To bedraggle. He headed down the middle of the street, his breathing evening out after the trachle across the beach. - Ducan McLean, Bucket of Tongues, 1992	
agrement /ah-GRAY-mahnt, -mahn*/ [the final syllable is nasal]	"noun 1. Formal approval, especially one given by a country to the proposed diplomat from another country. 2. Grace notes: notes applied as an embellishment on a piece of music. [From French agrément (approval, agreement, pleasure), from Latin ad- (to) + gratus (pleasing). Earliest documented use: 1711.] ""Relations again deteriorated when Iran denied agrement to UK designate ambassador to Tehran, accusing him of being a spy."" - Shireen Hunter; Iran's Foreign Policy in the Post-Soviet Era; Praeger; 2010."	
birdlime /BUHRD-lym/	"verb tr.: To ensnare. noun: Something that ensnares. [From birdlime (a sticky substance made from holly, mistletoe, or other plants, and smeared on branches and twigs to catch small birds), from bird + lime, from Latin limus (slime). Earliest documented use: 1440.] ""Some dozen of these villains had her birdlimed inside a shepherd's hut when our patrol chanced upon them."" - Steven Pressfield; Last of the Amazons; Bantam; 2003."	
mensal /MEN-suhl/	"adjective 1. Monthly. 2. Relating to the table. [For 1: From Latin mensis (month). Earliest documented use: 1475. For 2: From Latin mensa (table). Earliest documented use: 1440.] ""I refer to your addled account of an exchange between you and Mike Butler relative to mensal checks from home."" - John Lewis-Stempel; Fatherhood; Simon & Schuster; 2001. ""Daphne was good at mensal ceremony; her each gesture and nibble, each sip from her tea bowl, was as graceful as a small ballet."" - John C. Wright; The Golden Age; Tor Books; 2003."	
makebate /MAYK-bayt/	"noun One who incites quarrels. [From make, from Old English macian (to make) + bate (contention), from Latin battuere (to beat) which also gave us abate, debate, and rebate. Earliest documented use: 1529.] ""'You leave my ma out of this, you makebate! She always said you'd end on the gallows, and she was right.'"" Barbara Metzger; Christmas Wishes; Signet; 2010."	
fustilarian /fuhs-tuh-LAR-ee-uhn/ fustilugs /FUS-ti-lugs/	"noun A fat and slovenly person. [From Middle English fusty (smelly, moldy). Earliest documented use: 1600. The first recorded use of the word is from Shakespeare's Henry IV in which Falstaff exclaims, ""Away, you scullion! You rampallion! You fustilarian! I'll tickle your catastrophe.""] ""I've no fancy to be guzzled up by a wolf or spitted on the tusks of one of the fustilarian wild boars."" - Joan Aiken; Whispering Mountain; Starscape; 2002. ""'Come on, you old fustilugs,' he called, for she wheezed and blew and mounted with difficulty."" - Julian Rathbone; Joseph; Little Brown; 2001."	
mumpsimus /MUMP-suh-muhs/	"noun 1. A view stubbornly held in spite of clear evidence that it's wrong. 2. A person who holds such a view. [According to an old story, a priest used the nonsense word mumpsimus (instead of Latin sumpsimus) in the Mass. Even when told it was incorrect, he insisted that he had been saying it for 40 years and wouldn't change it. The expression is ""quod in ore sumpsimus"" ('which we have taken into the mouth'). Earliest documented use: 1530.] ""She knows the boss's behavior is wrong but mumpsimus has set in."" - Mary Lou Dobbs; Repotting Yourself; O Books; 2010. ""Do not be a mumpsimus about networking. ... Resist the popular notion that networking is all fake sincerity and pushy behavior."" - Dean Lindsay; Cracking the Networking Code; World Gumbo; 2005."	
scabrous \SKAB-ruhs\	"adjective 1. Full of difficulties. 2. Having a rough surface because of minute points or projections. 3. Indecent or scandalous; risqué; obscene: scabrous books. [Scabrous is related to the common word scab. Both terms come from the Latin word scaber meaning ""rough.""] The old divorce case had been revived by a journalist. It was moderately scabrous. It had been with the wife of a still-prominent Tory politician. - C. P. Snow, In Their Wisdom, 2000 He had amused her with the exacting nature of his questions, and his demands that she should include even the most scabrous details in her accounts. - Sarah Shun-lien Bynum, Madeline is Sleeping, 2005"	
olid /O-lid/	"adjective Foul-smelling. [From Latin olere (to smell) which also gave us an opposite of today's word: redolent. Earliest documented use: 1680.] ""Ducks' blood smells no less olid than pig's blood."" - Merilyn Oniszczuk Jackson; A Sow of Violence; The Massachusetts Review (Amherst); Autumn 2004."	
dispositive \dih-SPOZ-i-tiv\	"adjective Relating to or bringing about the settlement of a case. [From dispose, from Old French disposer, from Latin disponere (to arrange), from dis- (apart) + ponere (to put). Ultimately from the Indo-European root apo- (off or away), which is also the source of pose, apposite, after, off, awkward, post, puny, apposite, and apropos. Earliest documented use: 1483.] ""The Justice Department subsequently asked the National Academy of Sciences to re-examine the Dictabelt evidence and it concluded it was not dispositive, which naturally led to years of debate among forensic acoustic experts."" - Ron Rosenbaum; Seeing Zapruder; Smithsonian (Washington, DC); Oct 2013. ""Marilyn Yalom supplements her summaries of love in French culture with lively, if hardly dispositive, anecdotes from her own encounters with France and the French."" - How the French Invented Love; The New Yorker; Feb 4, 2013."	
sook /rhymes with book/	"noun A timid or cowardly person; a crybaby. [Probably from English dialect suck. Earliest documented use: 1933.] ""I usually put on a brave face. I didn't want anyone to think I was a sook."" - Rosemary Howden; Episodes from a Fractured Childhood; Ginninderra Press; 2008."	
lucubrate /LOO-kyoo-brayt/	"verb intr. To work (such as study, write, discourse) laboriously or learnedly. [Here's a word that literally encapsulates the idiom ""to burn the midnight oil"". It's derived from Latin lucubrare (to work by lamplight), from lucere (to shine). Ultimately from the Indo-European root leuk- (light) that's resulted in other words such as lunar, lunatic, light, lightning, lucid, illuminate, illustrate, translucent, lux, and lynx.] ""So MPs have voted to lucubrate less. To lucubrate fewer? To sit for fewer midnight hours. To work less antisocial hours. To have less/fewer late nights."" - Philip Howard; Less is More Prevalent; The Times (London, UK); Nov 1, 2002."	
acarpous /ay-KAHR-puhs/	"adjective Not producing fruit; sterile. [From Greek akarpos, from a- (not) + karpos (fruit). Ultimately from the Indo-European root kerp- (to gather or harvest) which is also the source of harvest, excerpt, carpet, and scarce.] ""According to the doomsayers, if a satellite doesn't clobber you into the next millennium, there's always the danger its plutonium payload will turn your neighbourhood area into an acarpous wasteland."" - Adrian Bradley; Space Junk Roulette; The Australian (Sydney); Nov 19, 1996."	
impolitic \im-POL-i-tik\	"adjective Not politic, expedient, or judicious. [Impolitic combines the prefix im- meaning ""not,"" with the Greek root politikos meaning ""of citizens"" or ""pertaining to public life."" It entered English around 1600.] ""The cruelty, the impolitic cruelty,"" he replied, with great feeling, ""of dividing, or attempting to divide, two young people long attached to each other, is terrible…"" - Jane Austen, Sense and Sensibility, 1811 ""From my point of view it might be impolitic,"" said Stephen. Jack looked at him, saw that the matter had to do with intelligence and nodded. ""Are there any others you would object to?"" he asked - Patrick O'Brian, The Wine-Dark Sea, 1993"	
holograph \HOL-uh-graf, -grahf, HOH-luh-\	"adjective Wholly written by the person in whose name it appears: a holograph letter. noun A holograph writing, as a deed, will, or letter. [Holograph entered English in the 18th century from the Greek holos + graph, meaning ""whole written.""] The will was holograph, for Mr. Utterson, though he took charge of it now that it was made, had refused to lend the least assistance in the making of it... - Robert Louis Stevenson, Strange Case of Dr. Jekyll and Mr. Hyde, 1886 “An unexpectedly thoughtful young man,"" said Chase, straightening the frame of (Queen Victoria's holograph letter. Originally, he had planned to put the Emerson autograph between those of Longfellow and Tennyson but then he had had second thoughts about keeping a valuable letter addressed not so much to him as the Secretary of the Treasury and so, with a sad heart, he handed it over to the Treasure archives... - Gore Vidal, Lincoln: A Novel, 1984"	
bemused \bih-MYOOZD\	"adjective 1. Bewildered or confused. 2. Lost in thought; preoccupied. [Bemused comes from the Old French muser meaning ""to ponder,"" ""dream"" or ""waste time."" It entered English in the late 1800s, though the verb form bemuse has existed in English since the early-to-mid 1700s.] He was not only bemused by the voice he had heard. He was bemused by to the very grandeur of the position which he aspired. - Robert Penn Warren, All the King's Men, 1946 She said nothing else, she just watched his quiet bemused and intent face as he plumbed his empty pockets one by one. - William Faulkner, Pylon, 1935"	
lacerate \LAS-uh-reyt\	"verb 1. To tear roughly; mangle: The barbed wire lacerated his hands. 2. To distress or torture mentally or emotionally; wound deeply; pain greatly: His bitter criticism lacerated my heart. adjective 1. Lacerated. [Lacerate entered English in the late 1500s from the Latin lacer meaning ""mangled"" or ""torn.""] She seemed to have the power still to lacerate him, inside his bowels. Not in his mind or spirit, but in his old emotional, passional self: right in the middle of his belly, to tear him and make him feel he bled inwardly.- D. H. Lawrence, The Plumed Serpent, 1926 For some weeks he confined the area of effeminacy to his left knee, and on one occasion he was base enough to lacerate the flesh in secret with a fish-hook in an attempt to justify the statement about his skin. - Sylvia Townsend Warner, Mr. Fortune's Maggot, 1927"	
doggerel \DAW-ger-uhl, DOG-er-\	"adjective Of verse a. Comic or burlesque, and usually loose or irregular in measure. b. Rude; crude; poor. noun Doggerel verse. [Doggerel is likely a blend of dog and the pejorative suffix -rel. It came to English in the 1400s as a way to insult bad poetry by implying that it could have been created by dogs, or could have only been enjoyed by dogs.] Whoever wrote that doggerel had picked up the Virginia gossip about Jefferson having a black ""wife,"" but Callender assumed the dialect poet had only a suspicion. -- William Safire, Scandalmonger, 2000 I found myself in a house of kindly people, who had found me on the third day wandering, weeping, and raving through the streets of St. John's Wood. They have told me since that I was singing some insane doggerel about “The Last Man Left Alive! Hurrah! The Last Man Left Alive!"" - H. G. Wells, War of the Worlds, 1898"	
bedraggle \bih-DRAG-uhl\	"verb To make limp and soiled, as with rain or dirt. [Bedraggle comes from the word draggle, which is a diminutive form of drag. It entered English in the 1700s.] The lane was long and soused and dark that led to the house I helped to fill and bedraggle. - Dylan Thomas, ""The Crumbs of One Man's Year,"" The Collected Stories of Dylan Thomas, first published in 1946 Here in town, she probably preferred to tread the extent of the two drawing-rooms, and measure out the miles by spaces of forty feet, rather than bedraggle her skirts over the sloppy pavements. - Nathaniel Hawthorne, The Blithedale Romance, 1852"	
Procrustes /pro-KRUS-teez/	"noun A person imposing conformity without concern for individuality. [After Procrustes, a giant in Greek mythology, who stretched or cut his victims to make them fit his bed. He was killed by Theseus. From Greek Procroustes (stretcher). The word is more often used in its adjective form procrustean. Earliest documented use: 1581.] ""But is not almost every man a Procrustes? We have not the power of showing our cruelty exactly in the same method, but actuated by the like spirit, we abridge of their liberty, and torment by scorn, all who either fall short, or exceed the usual standard."" - Sarah Scott; Millennium Hall; Broadview Press; 1995."	
od \od, ohd\	"noun A hypothetical force formerly held to pervade all nature and to manifest itself in magnetism, mesmerism, chemical action, etc. [The term od was coined by chemist and philosopher Karl Ludwig von Reichenbach as a name for his hypothetical force. He proposed the name od because he thought a short word starting with a vowel would be more easily combined in compound words.] ""I studied mind-cure, or metaphysical healing, which strikes at the root of disease; I went into hypnotism, mesmerism, and phreno-magnetism, and the od force—I don't suppose you know about the od which Reichenbach discovered."" - Edward Eggleston, The Faith Doctor: a Story of New York, 1891 In these experiments, different substances from which the od was supposed to emanate were arranged on a collodion plate. - Edited by Clément Chéroux, The Perfect Medium: Photography and the Occult, 2005"	
anatopism /uh-NAT-uh-piz-ehm/	"noun The error of placing something out of its proper place; also something placed erroneously. [From Greek ana- (against) + topos (place). Anatopism is to place what anachronism is to time. Earliest documented use: 1812.] ""The Bard is often accused of anatopism -- that is, getting his geography wrong. Why else would he, in The Taming of the Shrew, put a sailmaker in Bergamo, a landlocked city in Italy, ask critics?"" D. Murali; Shakespeare, 'Literary Equivalent of an Electron'; The Hindu (Chennai, India); Dec 2, 2007. ""Homer may have taken some slight and temporary liberty with the facts, but it does not amount to the major anatopism that some commentators have found in it and should not be taken as evidence that Homer did not have firsthand knowledge of the area."" John Victor Luce; Celebrating Homer's Landscapes; Yale University Press; 1998."	
elflock /ELF-lok/	"noun A tangled lock of hair. [An elflock is a mass of hair supposedly tangled by elves, as a mother might explain to her daughter while untangling her snarled locks after a slumber. From Old English aelf. Ultimately from the Indo-European root albho- (white), which is also the source of oaf, albino, album, albumen, and albedo. Earliest documented use: 1596.] ""Rowling's stories hurtle along like an out-of-control broomstick; her plots are as tangled as elflocks."" - Harry Potter and the Magic Brew-haha; Fort Worth Star-Telegram; Dec 19, 1999."	
lam \lam\	"verb 1. To beat; thrash. 2. To beat; strike; thrash (usually followed by out or into). [Lam likely finds its roots in the Old Norse lemja meaning ""to lame."" It entered English in the late 16th century.] Like kingpins, one steel tier lammed into another, then they all crashed to the floor with a sound as of the roof falling. - Richard Wright, Black Boy, 1945 That was just before he lammed out—the time he knocked off that crumb from uptown. I remember once when Harry cut up a guy so bad, the guy couldn't walk. - Ed McBain, Learning to Kill, 2006"	
prolepsis /pro-LEP-sis/	"noun 1. The use of a descriptive word in anticipation of the result. Example: The word hot in hot water heater. 2. The anticipation and answering of an objection or argument before it's raised. Also known as prebuttal. 3. The representation of an event before it actually happened. Example: He lost the game even before the match began. 4. The anachronistic representation of an event before its actual time. Also known as prochronism. Example: A depiction of people talking wirelessly over long distances in 18th century. 5. A literary technique in which the author drops hints of things to come. Also known as foreshadowing. 6. The return of a paroxysm of a periodic disease before its usual time or at progressively shorter intervals. [From Greek prolepsis, from prolambanein (to anticipate), from pro- (before) + lambanein (to take). Earliest documented use: 1450.] ""As preservationists and residents threatened with displacement join 're-open Charity' proponents, planners symbolically engage in prolepsis, rhetorically precluding opposing arguments with flash forward of supposedly 'done deals.'"" - Anne Lovell; Debating Life After Disaster; Medical Anthropology Quarterly; Jun 2011. ""You have no right to interrupt the council's session, and such a dangerous prolepsis as this will not be allowed to change the debate."" - Kim Stanley Robinson; Galileo's Dream; Spectra; 2009. ""The thought threw me into a vernal prolepsis, a mental flash-forward to spring."" - Verlyn Klinkenborg; The Farm From Afar; The New York Times; Mar 22, 2013."	
corsair \KAWR-sair\	"noun 1. A pirate, especially formerly of the Barbary Coast. 2. A fast ship used for piracy. 3. (initial capital letter) Military. a gull-winged, propeller-driven fighter plane built for the U.S. Navy in World War II and kept in service into the early 1950s. [Corsair came to English in the 16th century from the medieval Latin cursus meaning ""hostile voyage.""] The cassique of Kiawah is already known to us, and we may well conceive that he bore himself toward the little wife of the famous corsair with all proper kindliness. - William Glimore Simms, The Cassique of Kiawah: A Colonial Romance, 1859 We were five days at sea in the situation I have just described, and the captain entertained hopes of making the desired port in two days more, when a vessel was descried bearing down upon us, which proved to be an Algerine corsair… - Francis Lathom, The Mysterious Freebooter, or The Days of Queen Bess, 1806"	
kabuki /kah-BOO-kee, KAH-boo-kee/	"1. A form of Japanese drama that includes highly stylized movements, dances, singing, and miming, and all parts are played by males. 2. Done for the show only; make-believe. [From Japanese kabuki, from ka (song) + bu (dance) + ki (skill). Apparently this is a reinterpreted form of the verb kabuku (to lean, deviate, or act dissolutely). Kabuki is the popular form of the older Noh, the classical drama of Japan. Earliest documented use: 1899.] ""I think a first date should go like this: The man reaches for the check, the woman offers to split it, the man declines, saying 'No, I've got it.' It's a bit of Kabuki theater."" - Andrea Pyros; You're Paying, Right?; Denver Post (Colorado); Nov 12, 2012. ""In the kabuki theatre of British parliamentary politics, great crimes do not happen and criminals go free."" - John Pilger; Let's Learn from Blair's Mistakes; New Statesman (London, UK); Feb 20, 2012. ""Cokie Roberts: This week though, really, is a kabuki dance. Everybody is going through motions that they know are going to lead nowhere."" - Deadline Still Hangs Over Debt-Ceiling Talks; Morning Edition; National Public Radio (Washington, DC); Jul 18, 2011."	
pari passu \PAH-ree PAHS-soo; Eng. PAIR-ahy PAS-oo, PAIR-ee\	"adverb 1. With equal pace or progress; side by side. 2. Without partiality; equably; fairly. [Pari passu comes directly from the Latin phrase of the same spelling. It commonly meant ""simultaneously"" and literally meant ""with equal step.""] But the ingenious machinery contrived by the Gods for reducing human possibilities of amelioration to a minimum—which arranges that wisdom to do shall come pari passu with the departure of zest for doing—stood in the way of all that. - Thomas Hardy, The Mayor of Casterbridge, 1886 Man who falls victim to transcendence as the spirit of abstraction, i.e., elevates self to posture over and against world which is pari passu demoted to immanence and seen as exemplar and specimen and coordinate, and who is not at same time compensated by beauty of motion of method of science, has no choice but to seek reentry into immanent world qua immanence. - Walker Percy, The Last Gentleman, 1966"	
syncope /SING-kuh-pee/	"noun 1. The shortening of a word by omission of sounds or letters from its middle. For example, did not to didn't or Worcester to Wooster. 2. Fainting caused by insufficient blood flow to the brain. [From Latin syncope, from Greek synkope (contraction, cutting off), from syn- (together) + koptein (to cut). Earliest documented use: c. 1400.] ""There were important books on vowel syncope in Greek and Indo-European."" - Robert Coleman; Oswald Szemerenyi -- Hungary's Eclectic Cockney Linguist; The Guardian (London, UK); Feb 24, 1997. ""'I'm no doctor, but they say I just fainted,' said Pavelec, who had what is termed a neurocardiogenic syncope episode."" - NHL Report; The Philadelphia Inquirer; Oct 20, 2010."	
serotinal \si-ROT-n-l, ser-uh-TAHYN-l\	"adjective Pertaining to or occurring in late summer. [Serotinal entered English in the early twentieth century. It is derived from the Latin word sērōtinus meaning ""late of time.""] The night condenses into me, allays the bonds of my serotinal blight. Count Dracula and I share in this flight: we seek moist shadows underneath the quays, in marrow-darkness bid our bodies twist. - Philip K. Jason, Near the Fire, 1983 Botanists use the word serotinous to describe late-blossoming, and serotinal refers to the late-summer season of the year, especially used in descriptions of life-histories of freshwater organisms (Allaby 1985). - Robert J. Whelan, The Ecology of Fire, 1995 In these population dynamic trends obvious differences exist between the aestival and serotinal aspects. - Acta Entomologica Bohemoslovaca, 1986"	
habiliment \huh-BIL-uh-muhnt\	"noun 1. Usually, habiliments. a. Clothes or clothing. b. Clothes as worn in a particular profession, way of life, etc. 2. Habiliments, accouterments or trappings. [Habiliment comes from the French word of the same spelling. It's from the root habiller meaning ""to dress.""] At this very moment, perhaps, Toad is busy arraying himself in those singularly hideous habiliments so dear to him, which transform him from a (comparatively) good-looking Toad into an Object which throws any decent-minded animal that comes across it into a violent fit. - Kenneth Grahame, The Wind in the Willows, 1908 It deepened; it purified. It lost its previous comedic habiliments, its air of shtick, and became unadulterated, lethal, pure despair. - Jeffrey Eugenides, The Marriage Plot, 2011"	
interlocutor /in-tuhr-LOK-yuh-tuhr, -yoo-/	"noun One who takes part in a conversation or dialogue, especially as a representative of an organization. [From Latin inter- (between) + loqui (to speak). Earliest documented use: 1518.] ""During the meeting, the two interlocutors spoke about the existing relations between the two countries."" - Ambassador Meets With Chief Executive of Macau; Angola Press Agency (Luanda); Oct 30, 2007."	
putrescent /pyoo-TRES-uhnt/	adjective 1. Becoming putrid; undergoing putrefaction. 2. Of or pertaining to putrefaction. [1725–35; < Latin putrēscent- (stem of putrēscēns ), present participle of putrēscere to grow rotten] Organic repellents with an active ingredient of urine, putrescent egg solids, dried blood or fish oil are effective. Pity the uneducated who fall for its putrescent claims though.	
anfractuous \an-FRAK-choo-uhs\	"adjective Characterized by windings and turnings; sinuous; circuitous: an anfractuous path. [Anfractuous is a back formation of the word anfractuosity meaning ""a winding bend.""] Down high anfractuous rocks flowed the odor of rotten eggs from nests deserted by the hawks. - Jean Giono, The Horseman on the Roof, 1982 At the foot of this anfractuous path which leads to the summit of Sam's Island lies the incredible Black Bay. - Ishmael Reed, The Free-Lance Pallbearers, 1967"	
dissilient \dih-SIL-ee-uhnt\	"adjective Bursting apart; bursting open. [Dissilent comes from the Latin word dissilīre meaning ""to leap apart.""] I imagined the dissilient pod of rumours a creative bureau chief up for promotion might hatch. Stories, once sprung, would snowball out of control, growing more damaging with each repetition. - Susan Daitch, L.C., 2002 The court was dissilient, generationally fractured, manned (as it were) by an increasingly impatient and acquisitive nobility. - Eric Scott Mallin, Inscribing the Time, 1995"	
fleer \fleer\	"verb 1. To grin or laugh coarsely or mockingly. 2. To mock or deride. 3. A fleering look; a jeer or gibe. [Fleer originally comes from the Norwegian word flire meaning ""a grin.""] Talley's lips fleer back, baring his teeth. - David L. Robbins, Scorched Earth, 2009 They fleered at Kit; they jostled. - Kelly Link, Trampoline, 2003"	
umbratile /um-BRA-tile/	A reclusive person, one who keeps in the shade by staying indoors. See also umbratic: Of or pertaining to the shade or darkness; shadowy; unreal; secluded; retired.	
lapsus linguae /LAP-suhs LING-gwee, LAHP-soos LING-gwy/	"noun A slip of the tongue. [From Latin lapsus linguae (slip of the tongue). Earliest documented use: 1668. Malapropisms and spoonerisms are two examples of lapsus linguae. And here is an example of a lapsus linguae which cost a game show contestant a potential one-million-dollar prize. A lapsus calami is a slip of the pen.] ""True, Bush mispronounced the name of Spain's Prime Minister Jose Maria Aznar, but not even that lapsus linguae could sour the mood in the first meeting between the two conservatives."" Bush's Gateway to Europe; Los Angeles Times; Jun 22, 2001."	
shrift /shrift/	"noun Confession to a priest. Also, penance and absolution that follow confession. [From Old English scrift (confession, penance), from scrifan (to shrive: to impose penance). Ultimately from the Indo-European root skribh- (to cut, separate, or sift) that has resulted in other terms, such as manuscript, scribe, subscribe, scripture, scribble, and describe. Earliest documented use: 897. The term nowadays is mostly seen in the form ""to get short shrift"" meaning to receive little consideration or a curt treatment. Originally, short shrift was what condemned criminals received: brief time granted to them for confession and absolution before execution.] ""Their schools focus on religious learning: even basic subjects such as maths and English get short shrift."" - Talmud and Cheesecake; The Economist (London, UK); Jul 28, 2012. ""Downey's midcareer comeback is also given fair shrift in this absorbing account of one man's amazing triumph over his voracious demons."" - Chris Keech; Robert Downey Jr.: The Fall and Rise of the Comeback Kid; The Booklist (Chicago); Dec 15, 2010."	
annulate \AN-yuh-lit, -leyt\	"adjective 1. Having rings or ringlike bands. 2. Formed of ringlike segments, as an annelid worm. [Annulate entered English in the 1800s from the Latin annulus meaning ""ring.""] This may be called, for distinctness' sake, the annulate corpuscle. - Thomas Henry Huxley, An Introduction to the Study of Zoology, 2006 A cast-iron stove dragged its annulate pipe along the wall, then folded it into the overhead motley of the flags. - Vladimir Nabokov, ""The Fight,"" 1925"	
sclerotic /skluh-ROT-ik/	"adjective 1. Hard, rigid, slow to adapt or respond. 2. Relating to or affected with sclerosis, an abnormal hardening of a tissue or part. 3. Of or relating to the sclera, the white fibrous outer layer of the eyeball. [From Greek skleros (hard). Earliest documented use: 1543.] ""It was getting to be late in the afternoon, and the traffic was crabby and sclerotic."" - Miss Wyoming; Douglas Coupland; Random House; 2000. ""This group decided that if the government bureaucracy had grown so sclerotic, it was time for a small, professional group of private citizens to give attention to delicate problems of the world."" - Gene Coyle; Diamonds and Deceit; AuthorHouse; 2011."	
tumid /TOO-mid, TYOO-/	"adjective 1. Swollen. 2. Bulging. 3. Pompous, bombastic. [From Latin tumere (to swell). Earliest documented use: 1541.] ""Her tumid eyes filled with tears and she began to cry."" - Joseph Heller; Catch-22; Simon & Schuster; 1961. ""Think of all the suits in marketing, communications, and public relations who clog up the institutional arteries with their tumid prose and clichéd sound bites."" - Blaise Cronin; Bloomington Days; AuthorHouse; 2012."	
chattel \CHAT-l\	"noun 1. Law. A movable article of personal property. 2. Any article of tangible property other than land, buildings, and other things annexed to land. 3. A slave. [Chattel came to English in the 1400s and shares a root with the word cattle.] ""Mr. Price has instructed me to visit with you and make arrangements for a transfer of chattel to the bank sufficient to cover the amount of ""—he looked down at his clipboard— ""one thousand dollars even."" - Will Weaver, Red Earth White Earth, 1986 But now! Gervase himself had not seemed a very important part of that triumph a little while ago. He had been a chattel of hers, a piece of property as much her own as her parasol. - Margaret Oliphant, The Cuckoo in the Nest, 1892"	
falstaffian \fal-STAF-ee-uhn\	"adjective Fat, jolly, and convivial. [Here's a serious word, just for fun. That is to say, it means ""fun,"" but it was created in all seriousness around 1940 by psychologists. They wanted a term to describe what children do, and they came up with ""ludic activity."" That may seem ludicrous — why not just call it ""playing""? — but the word ""ludic"" caught on, and it's not all child's play anymore. It can refer to architecture that is playful, narrative that is humorous and even satirical, and literature that is light. ""Ludic"" is ultimately from the Latin noun ""ludus,"" which refers to a whole range of fun things — stage shows, games, sports, even jokes. The more familiar word ""ludicrous"" also traces back to the same source. After Sir John Falstaff, a character in Shakespeare's plays Henry IV (parts 1 & 2) and The Merry Wives of Windsor. Earliest documented use: 1809.] ""His hair was long and scruffy, his ties ludicrous and his manner jovial bordering on Falstaffian; a board meeting, for him, was a debate, punctuated by gales of his maniacal laughter."" - John Harvey-Jones; The Economist (London, UK); Jan 17, 2008."	
obsequy \OB-si-kwee\	"noun A funeral rite or ceremony. [Obsequy comes from the Latin obsequium meaning ""compliance, dutiful service."" It's been used in English since the late 14th century.] From this session interdict / Every fowl of tyrant wing, / Save the eagle, feathered king; / Keep the obsequy so strict. - William Shakespeare, ""The Phoenix and the Turtle,"" 1601 Sitting there while the Baptist minister did his glib and rapid office, he (Stevens) looked around at the faces, town faces and country faces, the citizens who represented the town because the town should be represented at this obsequy… - William Faulkner, The Mansion, 1959"	
schmo or schmoe or shmo /shmo/	"noun A stupid, boring, or obnoxious person. [A truncated form of schmuck (an idiot), from Yiddish schmok (pen is). Earliest documented use: 1948. The word is also used in the phrase Joe Schmo, as a more colorful synonym for John Doe.] ""Just because I work at a bar does not mean I want to date every schmo that walks in here."" - Joey Guerra; Bartender Confessions: Jodi Minear; Houston Chronicle (Texas); Dec 9, 2010."	
subjoin \suhb-JOIN\	"verb 1. To add at the end, as of something said or written; append. 2. To place in sequence or juxtaposition to something else. [Subjoin is derived from the Middle French word subjoindre which meant ""to add at the end.""] And will you give yourself the trouble of carrying similar assurances to his creditors in Meryton, of whom I shall subjoin a list, according to his information? - Jane Austen, Pride and Prejudice, 1813 We subjoin a specimen which has been rendered into English by an eminent scholar whose name for the moment we are not at liberty to disclose though we believe that our readers will find the topical allusion rather more than an indication. - James Joyce, Ulysses, 1922"	
antitype \AN-ti-tahyp\	"noun Something that is foreshadowed by a type or symbol, as a New Testament event prefigured in the Old Testament. [Antitype comes from the Late Greek word antítypos which meant ""the impression left by a die.""] These were but the foreshadowing of their great and glorious antitype, Christ and the gospel, which are the spiritual fulfillment of the promises made to Abraham. - J. W. Byers, Sanctification, 2009 The ship in danger is easily understood to be its old antitype, the Commonwealth. - Jonathan Swift, A Tale of a Tub, 1704"	
maugre \MAW-ger\	"preposition In spite of; notwithstanding. [Maugre comes from the Middle French word that literally meant ""spite, ill-will.""] But the angel in the dream did, and, maugre Plain Talk, put quite other notions into the candle-maker. - Herman Melville, The Confidence-Man, 1857 I protest, / Maugre thy strength, youth, place, and eminence, / Despite thy victor-sword and fire-new fortune, / Thy valour and thy heart, thou art a traitor / False to thy gods, thy brother, and thy father, / Conspirant 'gainst this high illustrious prince, / And from th'extremest upward of thy head / To the descent and dust beneath thy feet, / A most toad-spotted traitor. - William Shakespeare, King Lear, 1623"	
amaranthine /am-uh-RAN-thin, -thyn/	"adjective 1. Unfading; everlasting. 2. Of deep purple-red color. 3. Of or related to the amaranth. [From amaranth (an imaginary, undying flower), from Latin amarantus, from Greek amarantos (unfading), from a- (not) + marainein (to fade). Ultimately from the Indo-European root mer- (to rub away or to harm), which is also the source of morse, mordant, amaranth, morbid, mortal, mortgage, nightmare, ambrosia, and premorse. Earliest documented use: 1667.] ""Garda has retained its amaranthine appeal as one of the continent's most timeless getaways."" Thomas Breathnach; Still Waters Run Deep at Lake Garda; Irish Independent (Dublin, Ireland); Oct 19, 2013. ""The sky was now a deep dark amaranthine -- the color of blood -- and it was getting progressively harder to see through the gloom."" Steve Feasey; Demon Games; Macmillan; 2012."	
disprize /dis-PRYZ/	"verb tr. To disdain or scorn. [From Old French desprisier (dispraise), from Latin pretium (price, worth, or reward). Ultimately from the Indo-European root per- (to traffic in, to sell) which also gave us praise, price, precious, appreciate, appraise, and interpret. Earliest documented use: 1480.] ""And disprize them [jingles] as we might, they are an art form."" - James Parker; Let Us Now Praise... Jingles; The Boston Globe; Dec 6, 2009."	
jocose \joh-KOHS, juh-\	"adjective Given to or characterized by joking; jesting; humorous; playful: a jocose and amusing manner. [Jocose comes from the Latin jocōsus meaning ""joking."" It entered English in the 1600s.] The jocose talk of hay-makers is best at a distance; like those clumsy bells round the cows' necks, it has rather a coarse sound when it comes close, and may even grate on your ears painfully... - George Eliot, Adam Bede, 1859 Lord Boardotrade was there, making semi-jocose speech, quite in the approved way for a cognate paterfamilias. - Anthony Trollope, Ayala's Angel, 1878"	
pratfall /PRAT-fawl/	"noun A humiliating failure, blunder, or defeat. [A pratfall is literally a fall on the buttocks. The word is figuratively used to describe embarrassing errors or failures. From prat (buttocks, fool) + fall. Earliest documented use: 1939.] ""Some caution that stockpiling is ending and both markets are in for a pratfall."" - Ray Turchansky; Asian Consumers Likely Spend Us Out of Our Financial Mess; The Vancouver Sun (Canada); Aug 21, 2009."	
ochlophobia \ok-luh-FOH-bee-uh\	"noun Psychiatry. An abnormal fear of crowds. [Ochlophobia entered English in the late 1800s from the Greek roots meaning ""mob"" and ""fear.""] ""The man's got pedophobia, homichlophobia, dromophobia, xenophobia, ochlophobia, haphephobia, planomania, kleptophobia, thanatophobia, he's an onychophagist, he's got gerontophobia, but notice he has no dysphagia…"" - George Friel, Mr. Alfred, M.A., 1972 As the plane leveled her discomfort ebbed. Agoraphobia. Demophobia. Enochlophobia. Ochlophobia. She knew the terms but refused to label her condition a phobia. - Rick Mofina, The Panic Zone, 2010"	
blandish /BLAN-dish/	"verb To coax with flattery. [From Latin blandiri (to flatter). Ultimately from the Indo-European root mel- (soft), which also gave us bland, melt, smelt, malt, mild, mulch, mollify, mollusk, emollient, enamel, smalto, and schmaltz. Earliest documented use: 1305.] ""In his first speech in the Parliament, Mussolini insulted and blandished the legislature by turns."" - Thomas Bokenkotter; Church and Revolution; Doubleday; 1998."	
poultice \POHL-tis\	"noun A soft, moist mass of cloth, bread, meal, herbs, etc., applied hot as a medicament to the body. verb To apply a poultice to. [Poultice came to English in the 1500s from the Latin puls meaning ""porridge.""] ...he did not notice whether I was going to spike him or put on a poultice. - -- David Rattlehead, The Life and Adventures of an Arkansaw Doctor, 1851 ""...I thought I could nurse her; I did my best. Was the poultice all right?"" - -- George Moore, Spring Days: A Realistic Novel, 1888"	
colligate /KOL-i-gayt/	"verb To bind or group together. [From Latin colligare, from com- (together) + ligare (bind). Ultimately from the Indo-European root leig (to bind), which is also the source of oblige, alloy, ally, rely, lien, league, liable, ligature, and furl. Earliest documented use: 1545.] ""Chizz made a quick overview of the situation, attempting to colligate the loose ends of a somewhat fragmented movie."" - Ihebom C. Reginald; Forbidden Choice; Xlibris; 2013."	
advent \AD-vent\	"noun 1. A coming into place, view, or being; arrival: the advent of the holiday season. 2. (usually initial capital letter) The coming of Christ into the world. 3. (initial capital letter) The period beginning four Sundays before Christmas, observed in commemoration of the coming of Christ into the world. 4. (usually initial capital letter) Second Coming. [Advent came to English in the 1100s from the Latin adventus meaning ""arrival"" or ""approach.""] Mrs. Davilow, too, although she would not respond to her sister's pregnant remark, could not be inwardly indifferent to an advent that might promise a brilliant lot for Gwendolen. - George Eliot, Daniel Deronda, 1876 The rest of the hogs are grouped around in various attitudes, more or less influenced by the advent of the Knight. - William Gilmore Simms, The Golden Christmas, 1852"	
oeillade \œ-YAD\	"noun An amorous glance; ogle. [Oeillade entered English in the late 1500s from the French oeillide, and ultimately comes from the Latin ocuclus meaning ""eye.""] ""Please?"" Significant pause and oeillade. Eugene thought of his hopes with Rapunzel, of badly wanting to start a clean slate, baleful of all the miseries Laura had caused whenever they had resumed even a friendship... - Alexander Theroux, Laura Warholic, or, The Sexual Intellectual, 2007 Another coarse laugh, and another oeillade to the Princesses, showed me clearly enough how the Queen construed my relationship to Anne of England. - Louis Auchincloss, Exit Lady Masham, 1983"	
onanism /oh-NUH-niz-uhm/	noun 1. Masturbation. 2. Withdrawal of the penis in sexual intercourse so that ejaculation takes place outside the vagina; coitus interruptus. [1720–30; after Onan, son of Judah (Gen. 38:9); see -ism]	
delitescent \del-i-TES-uhnt\	"adjective Concealed; hidden; latent. [Delitescent comes from the Latin word dēlitēscere meaning ""to hide away.""] “I am a delitescent writer.” “What does that mean?” It means I didn't start the book. - Rex Stout, Double for Death, 1939 He obviously detected some delitescent power within Claudie, or some power which he would create and set there, something hidden from the rest of us… - Stephen Glazier, The Lost Provinces, 1981"	
ruck /ruk/	"noun 1. A large mass, especially of ordinary people or things. 2. A crease or wrinkle. verb tr., intr. 1. In the US military, to carry heavy loads while afoot. To make a crease or to become creased. [From Old Norse hrukka (wrinkle, fold). Ultimately from the Indo-European root sker- (to turn or bend), which is also the source of ranch, rank, shrink, circle, circa, crisp, corolla, search, ring, curb, ridge, curve, corolla, and coronary. Earliest documented use: 1225.] ""Any genuine pilgrim would have to fight his way past a ruck of tourists to get close to such an object."" - Keith Miller; St Peter's; Profile Books; 2010. ""She ran across the room and tripped on the rucked carpet under the bed."" - Liz Ryan; Sometimes a Rogue; Hodder & Stoughton; 1997."	
echt \ekht\	adjective Real; authentic; genuine. [Echt entered English from the German word of the same spelling in the early 1900s.] This is true or echt because I used a calculator. - Patricia Wood, Lottery, 2008 Outside, there is the kind of veiled, wintry sunshine which never manages to warm the chilly air, stirred by a light and capricious, echt Berlin breeze. - Alain Robbe-Grillet, Repetition, 2003	
stellenbosch /STE-len-bosh/	"verb tr. To relegate someone incompetent to a position of minimal responsibility. [After Stellenbosch, a town in South Africa. Earliest documented use: 1900. Stellenbosch, near Cape Town, was a British military base during the Second Boer War. Officers who had not proven themselves were sent to Stellenbosch, to take care of something relatively insignificant, such as to look after horses. Even if they kept their rank, this assignment was considered a demotion. Eventually the term came to be applied when someone was reassigned to a position where he could do little harm.] ""His erstwhile colleague acknowledged Mr Myers's absence. Has Mr Myers been stellenbosched?"" - Does RTE Object to Frugality?; Irish Independent; (Dublin, Ireland); Nov 13, 2008."	
idem \AHY-dem, ID-em\	"pronoun The same as previously given or mentioned. [Idem stems from the Latin word of the same spelling which meant essentially ""it.""] Moreover, the EU presents a governance system where the authority of government is dispersed into multiple levels and institutions (idem, p. 20). - Giovanni Moro, Citizens in Europe, 2011 Indeed, if narrative identity is the identity of the characters associated with this leisure life-world, it is also the identity which links ipse and idem. - Tony Blackshaw, Leisure Life, 2003"	
boîte \bwaht; Fr. bwat\	"noun A nightclub; cabaret. [Boîte entered English in the early 1900s from the French word of the same spelling, which literally means ""box"" but is also used to refer to a nightclub, from the phrase boîte de nuit which means ""box of the night.""] Three more people entered the boîte and one of them was Clarisse. She saw Daniel, nodded without smiling and looked for a place to sit. - Hugh MacLennan, Return of the Sphinx, 1967 You're here now, at this groovy new boîte, for instance. - Kim Moritsugu, The Restoration of Emily, 2006"	
boffin \BOF-in\	noun A scientist or technical expert. [Boffin arose in the early 1940s. Though there are many hypotheses about its etymology, its origin remains unknown.] A brilliant boffin — well, everyone attached to Tea Clipper was brilliant in one way or another. - Tom Clancy, The Cardinal of the Kremlin, 1988 Two years thinking of nothing else. Nobel laureate, balding boffin, government appointee, in the dock, fighting to stay out of jail. - Ian McEwan, Solar, 2010	
scud /skud/	"verb intr. 1. To run or move swiftly. 2. In nautical parlance, to run before a gale with little or no sail set. noun 1. The act of scudding. 2. Clouds, rain, mist, etc. driven by the wind. 3. Low clouds beneath another cloud layer. [Of uncertain origin, possibly from Middle Low German schudden (to shake). Earliest documented use: 1609.] ""The moon was bright, but the clouds scudding across kept throwing them [Harry, et al] into darkness."" - J.K. Rowling; Harry Potter and the Philosopher's Stone; Bloomsbury; 1997."	
inglenook \ING-guhl-nook\	"noun A corner or nook near a fireplace. [Inglenook is of obscure origin, though etymologists associate ingle with the Gaelic aingel meaning ""fire."" It entered English in the 1770s.] I seized his sleeve and drew him off a little into an inglenook where we could be less readily observed. - Sara Poole, The Borgia Betrayal, 2011 From the pile of wood, stacked at one side of the inglenook, he drew out a pair of bellows and began to blow new life into the ashes. - Marcia Willett, A Week in Winter, 2002 His kingdom is/ His inglenook-/ All this is his/ Who hath a book. - Wilbur D. Nesbit, A Book of Poems, 1906"	
whet /whet/	verb (used with object), whet·ted, whet·ting. 1. To sharpen (a knife, tool, etc.) by grinding or friction. 2. To make keen or eager; stimulate: to whet the appetite; to whet the curiosity. noun 3. The act of whetting. 4. Something that whets; appetizer or drink. [before 900; Middle English whetten (v.), Old English hwettan (derivative of hwæt bold); cognate with German wetzen, Old Norse hvetja, Gothic gahwatjan to incite]	
canker /KANG-kuhr/	"noun 1. A source of corruption or decay. 2. Ulcerous sores in the mouth; also any of various diseases affecting animals and plants. verb tr., intr. 1. To corrupt or to become corrupted. 2. To infect with or be infected with canker. [From Old English cancer (crab, tumor). Ultimately from the Indo-European root kar-/ker- (hard), which also gave us standard, cancer, and hard. Earliest documented use: 1384.] ""And in your family, so in the world ... we shall cut away the canker that infects us until only those of the true blood remain."" - J.K. Rowling; Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows; Bloomsbury; 2010."	
august \aw-GUHST\	"adjective 1. Venerable; eminent: an august personage. 2. Inspiring reverence or admiration; of supreme dignity or grandeur; majestic: an august performance of a religious drama. [August comes from the Latin augustus meaning ""venerable, noble."" It entered English in the 1660s.] Lafayette spoke, and bade farewell to Lamarque: it was a touching and august moment,--all heads were uncovered, and all hearts beat. - Victor Hugo, Les Misérables (in translation), 1862 Now, deserted by his monarch, far from home, trapped in the Poder Tower laboratory as the chief alchemist involved in the longevity elixir, this august gentleman had to use all his ingenuity and cunning to simply save his own life. - Frances Sherwood, The Book of Splendor, 2003"	
bestiary \BES-chee-er-ee, BEES-\	"noun A collection of moralized fables, especially as written in the Middle Ages, about actual or mythical animals. [Bestiary is from the Latin bestiaries meaning ""a fighter against beasts in the public entertainments."" It entered English in the 1620s.] It was pieced together into no named pattern native to this country, not star flower or flying bird of churn dasher or poplar leaf, but was some entirely made-up bestiary or zodiac of half-visionary creatures. - Charles Frazier, Cold Mountain, 1997 An inexperienced heraldist resembles a medieval traveler who brings back from the East the faunal fantasies influenced by the domestic bestiary he possessed all along rather than by the results of direct zoological exploration. - Vladamir Nabokov, Speak, Memory, 1951"	
purgation /pur-GAY-shen/	noun 1. The purification or cleansing of someone or something. The purgation by ritual violence of morbid social emotions. 2. (in Roman Catholic doctrine) The spiritual cleansing of a soul in purgatory. 3. historical The action of clearing oneself of accusation or suspicion by an oath or ordeal. 4. Evacuation of the bowels brought about by laxatives.	
acedia /uh-SEE-dee-uh/	noun Apathy; boredom; sloth. [From Latin acedia, from Greek akedia, from a- (not) + kedos (care). Earliest documented use: 1607. Acedia is neglecting to take care of something that one should do. It is related to melancholy: acedia describes the behavior and melancholy suggests the emotion producing it. In early Christian thought, the lack of joy was regarded as a willful refusal to enjoy the goodness of God and the world God created; by contrast, apathy was considered a refusal to help others in time of need. Aquinas described it as an uneasiness of the mind, being a progenitor for lesser sins such as restlessness and instability. Dante refined this definition further, describing acedia as the failure to love God with all one's heart, all one's mind and all one's soul; to him it was the middle sin, the only one characterised by an absence or insufficiency of love. Some scholars have said that the ultimate form of acedia was despair which leads to suicide.] Acedia plagues the novice much more than the experienced solitary; unlike some of the new guards, I do not suffer from boredom or listlessness. - Chloe Aridjis; Asunder; Mariner Books; 2013.	
palmer /PAH-muhr/	"noun 1. A pilgrim. 2. An itinerant monk. 3. One who conceals a card or another object in a magic trick or in cheating in a game. [From Latin palma (palm tree, palm of the hand). The name of the palm tree derives from the resemblance of the shape of its frond to the palm of a hand. In Medieval Europe, a pilgrim brought back a palm branch as a token of his pilgrimage. Earliest documented use: 1300. Also see palmy & palmary.] ""For the profane palmer the tour might indeed have been little more than a grand debauch, but for a devoted pilgrim like Jefferson it was something more."" - Michael Knox Beran; Jefferson's Demons; Free Press; 2003. ""That was magic -- not the apparent magic of the silk-hatted card-palmer, or the bold, brute trickery of the escape artist, but the genuine magic of art."" - Michael Chabon; The Amazing Adventures of Kavalier & Clay; Random House; 2000."	
gallivant or galavant /GAL-uh-vant/	"verb intr. To roam about in search of pleasure. [Perhaps alteration of gallant, from Old French galer (to rejoice). Earliest documented use: 1823.] ""Lady Gaga, Kyle Richards, and Carlton Gebbia gallivant around the streets of Amsterdam in thigh-high boots and trench coats just past midnight."" - Bradley Stern; Jewels n' Wives; Time (New York); Feb 12, 2014."	
scrutate /SKRU-tayt/	"verb tr. To investigate. [from Latin scrutari (to examine). Earliest documented use: 1882.] ""Philosophers have too often thought that they can learn more about human nature by scrutating the murky depths of substance and faculties than by interpreting the obvious evidence."" - John Lachs; The Relevance of Philosophy to Life; Vanderbilt University Press; 1995."	
claptrap \KLAP-trap\	noun 1. Pretentious but insincere or empty language: His speeches seem erudite but analysis reveals them to be mere claptrap. 2. Any artifice or expedient for winning applause or impressing the public. [Claptrap came to English in the 1720s as a portmanteau of clap and trap.] What is she to sneer at a brave, enduring race of fellow-beings! Dress them in tawdry rags, locate them anywhere on the continent, write out their history in sounding claptrap , and she would be stirred by pathetic thrills. - John Trafford Clegg, David's Loom: a story of Rochdale's life in the early years of the nineteenth century , 1894 ...it was on the whole an enormous piece of claptrap ; the room, almost vacant when I entered, began to fill. - Charotte Brontë, Villette , 1853	
coxcomb \KOKS-kohm\	noun A conceited, foolish dandy; pretentious fop. [Coxcomb is a corrupted spelling of cock's comb, the comb of a rooster, hence the badge resembling it that was worn in the cap of a professional fool or jester, hence the wearer of the cap, hence a fool or a vain and silly man.] In a country where intellect and action are trammelled and restrained, men of rank and fortune may become idlers and triflers with impunity; but an English coxcomb is inexcusable… - Washinton Irving, Bracebridge Hall, or The Humorists, A Medley , 1821 ...He is extremely insinuating; but it's a vulgar nature. I saw through it in a minute. He is altogether too familiar; - I hate familiarity. He is a plausible coxcomb . - Henry James	
basilic /buh-SIL-ik, -ZIL-/	"adjective Kingly; royal. [From Latin basilicus, from Greek basilikos (royal). Earliest documented use: 1727. Many things are named after this kingly word: plants, animals, architecture, and more. Basil, the aromatic herb of the mint family, is named so because it was used in royal preparations for medicine, bath, etc. A large vein of the upper arm is called the basilic vein due to its supposed importance. The basilisk lizard (and the legendary reptile) are named for their crown-like crest. In ancient Rome, a basilica was a large public court building and the word began to be applied to churches of the same form.] ""The fair Prince Filiberto solemnly approached the Pope. ... 'Are You quite good now?' the boy continued, with great black basilic eyes."" - Frederick Rolfe; Hadrian the VII; 1904."	
ambage /AM-bij/	"noun Ambiguity; circumlocution. [From Middle English ambages (equivocation), taken as a plural and the singular ambage coined from it. From Latin ambages, from ambi- (both, around) + agere (to drive). Ultimately from the Indo-European root ag- (to drive, draw, or move), which also gave us act, agent, agitate, litigate, synagogue, ambassador, agonistes, axiomatic, cogent, incogitant, exigent, exiguous, intransigent. Earliest documented use: 1374.] ""This increase in ambage measures increased arbitrariness."" - Harrison C. White; Identity and Control; Princeton University Press; 2008."	
passe-partout /pas-pahr-TOO/	"noun 1. Something, for example a master key, that enables unrestricted access. 2. An ornamental mat used to frame a picture. 3. An adhesive tape used to attach a picture to a mat, glass, backing, etc. [From French, literally, passes everywhere, from passer (to pass) + partout (everywhere), from par (through) + tout (all).] ""Francesco Isolabella, one of her lawyers, said, 'Marion True is being used as an excuse to criminalize all American museums.' Ms. True should not be used 'as a passe-partout to get at the Getty'."" - Elisabetta Povoledo; Casting Blame for Looting In Trial of Getty Ex-Curator; The New York Times; Jan 18, 2007."	
prelusive \pri-LOO-siv\	"adjective Introductory. [Prelusive is rooted in the Latin word praelūsiōn- which meant ""a prelude.""] ""Hepzibah involuntarily thought of the ghostly harmonies, prelusive of death in the family, which were attributed to the legendary Alice."" - Nathaniel Hawthorne, The House of the Seven Gables , 1851 Nay, which never in any other instance happened to the most fortunate poet, his very inaugural essays in verse were treated, not as prelusive efforts of auspicious promise, but as finished works of art, entitled to take their station amongst the literature of the land..."" - Thomas de Quincey, ""Alexander Pope,"" Biographical Essays , 1850"	
Portia /POR-shuh, -shee-uh/	"noun A female lawyer. [After Portia, the heroine of Shakespeare's The Merchant of Venice. Portia is a rich heiress who disguises herself as a lawyer to save Antonio's life. Earliest documented use: 1869.] ""'Listen sister...law isn't the only subject I've mastered!' snaps Betty, ... 'I may be a Portia, but my middle name's Dempsey!'"" - Mike Madrid; Divas, Dames & Daredevils; Exterminating Angel Press; 2013."	
anagnorisis \an-ag-NAWR-uh-sis, -NOHR-\	"noun (in ancient Greek tragedy) The critical moment of recognition or discovery, especially preceding peripeteia. [Anagnorisis comes from the Greek word anagnōrí(zein) which meant ""to know again."" This concept is discussed in Aristotle's Poetics.] In terms of anagnorisis, the mythic, tragic realisation that prophecies were correct is only really the case for fictional characters, yet it is a continually attractive idea for those of us who know that our lives don't have a plot. - Alice Bennett, Afterlife and Narrative in Contemporary Fiction , 2012 Tragedy and comedy both deal in errors of perception and their unveiling, a device known since the Greeks as anagnorisis . - David Bellos, Jacques Tati , 1999"	
quiff /kuif/	"noun 1. A tuft of hair brushed up above the forehead. 2. A woman considered as promiscuous. [For 1: Origin uncertain, perhaps from coif. Earliest documented use: 1890. For 2: Origin unknown. Earliest documented use: 1923.] ""Posters of the intrepid boy reporter with the quiff and funny pants plastered the city."" - Claire Rosemberg; Spielberg 'Brings Tintin Home' Hollywood-Style; Agence France Presse (Paris); Oct 22, 2011. ""A certain party got the quiff pregnant."" - William Deverell; The Dance of Shiva; ECW Press; 2004."	
bole /bohl/	"noun 1. The trunk of a tree. 2. Any of various kinds of soft fine clays typically of a reddish color. 3. A reddish brown color. [For 1: From Old Norse bolr (trunk). Ultimately from the Indo-European root bhel- (to blow or swell), which also gave us ball, balloon, boll, bulk, bowl, boulevard, boulder, ballot, folly, and fool. Earliest documented use: 1314. For 2-3: From Latin bolus (lump), from Greek bolos (clod). Earliest documented use: 1558.] ""In the midst of each room and hall, a living tree grows and holds up the roof, and its bole is hung with trophies and with antlers."" - J.R.R. Tolkien; The Book of Lost Tales; George Allen & Unwin; 1983. ""Rub off some gold to let the red bole show through."" - Martin Cruz; Gorky Park; Random House; 1981."	
Ananias /an-uh-NY-uhs/	"noun A liar. [After Ananias, who along with his wife Sapphira, was struck dead for lying. They sold a piece of land. Instead of giving away all of the proceeds from the sale, they kept a portion for themselves, to the displeasure of Peter. Earliest documented use: 1876.] ""Their 'exaggerations' and 'inventions' were roundly condemned. The worst offender was the Ananias whose dispatches to the New York World from Fort Keogh told of dead cattle, sixty-below temperatures, snow eight to fifty feet deep and the like."" - Helena Huntington Smith; The War on Powder River; University of Nebraska Press; 1966."	
caprine \KAP-rahyn, -rin\	"adjective Of or pertaining to goats. [Caprine is derived from the Latin word for ""goat,"" caper. It entered English in the early 1600s.] The Ghost looks like a creature begotten by the Maharishi Mahesh Yogi on a Tibetan mountain goat: it comes in crawling on its belly surrounded by dry ice, then rises and lunges into caprine capers. - John Simon, ""Spamlet,"" New York, 1969 Goats are more curious than horses and ponies, so until they're fully seasoned, allow them to carefully examine equipment each time you expect them to wear it. Take caprine nature into consideration when training a goat to drive. - Maggie Sayer, Storey's Guide to Raising Meat Goats, 2007"	
Ophelian /o-FEE-lee-uhn/	"adjective Displaying madness, suicidal tendencies, and similar characteristics. [After Ophelia, a character in Shakespeare's Hamlet, who is driven to insanity and kills herself. Earliest documented use: 1903.] ""She had an Ophelian streak of potential craziness that he had, since day one, deemed wiser to steer clear of."" - Jean-Christophe Valtat; Aurorarama; Melville House; 2010."	
Polonian /po-LO-nee-uhn/	"adjective 1. Abounding in aphoristic expressions. 2. A native or inhabitant of Poland. [For 1: After Polonius, a courtier and the father of Ophelia in Shakespeare's play Hamlet, known for his moralistic aphorisms. Earliest documented use: 1847. For 2: From Latin Polonia (Poland). Earliest documented use: 1533. Some of Shakespeare's best-known quotations come out of Polonius's mouth. As his son Laertes heads for France, Polonius advises: ""Neither a borrower nor a lender be, For loan oft loses both itself and friend."" ""This above all: to thine own self be true, And it must follow, as the night the day, Thou canst not then be false to any man."" At another time, he says: ""Brevity is the soul of wit."" As happens with quotations, some of his words have become simplified and sharpened with time, such as from the original ""For the apparel oft proclaims the man."" to ""Clothes make the man.""] ""A few Polonian precepts can do something to indicate whether or not a scientist is cut out for collaboration."" - P.B. Medawar; Advice To A Young Scientist; Harper and Row; 1980. ""Derek Mahon's admonitory phrases often sounds Polonian rather than Apollonian: 'Everything thrives on contrariety', 'Equip yourself in every way you can / to take it like a woman or a man.'"" - Hugh Haughton; The Poetry of Derek Mahon; Oxford University Press; 2007."	
noesis /no-EE-sis/	"noun 1. Cognition; perception. 2. The exercise of reason. [From Greek noesis (thought), from noein (to think, to perceive), from nous (mind). Earliest documented use: 1881.] ""The noesis of the fact that tigers roamed these areas since there were no boundaries, nor fences in this forest, didn't jab much at me."" - Vishal Gupta; A Bittersweet Nostalgia; Strategic Book Publishing; 2012. ""In an attempt to recollect the former few days, flashes of noesis pervaded my concentration."" - Jane E. Hill; So, Here I Stand; AuthorHouse; 2010."	
peregrine \PER-i-grin, -green, -grahyn\	"adjective 1. Foreign; alien; coming from abroad. 2. Wandering, traveling, or migrating. noun 1. Peregrine falcon. [Peregrine entered English in the late 1300s from the Latin peregrē literally meaning ""beyond the borders of the field.""] ""…an unmeasurable Profundity of Knowledge in the most peregrine and sublime Disciples…"" - Translated by Sir Thomas Urquhart and Peter Motteux, The Works of Mr. Francis Rabelais, Vol. 2, 1864 ""Salisbury Cathedral really is the ancestral home of the 'urban' peregrine, with records dating from the mid 1800s,"" he said. - ""Salisbury Cathedral spire peregrine falcon chicks hatch,"" BBC, 2014"	
strident \STRAHYD-nt\	"adjective 1. Making or having a harsh sound; grating; creaking: strident insects; strident hinges. 2. Having a shrill, irritating quality or character: a strident tone in his writings. [Strident entered English in the mid-1600s from the Latin strīdēre meaning ""to make a harsh noise.""] Only the parasites seemed to live there in a sinuous rush upwards into the air and sunshine, feeding on the dead and the dying alike, and crowning their victims with pink and blue flowers that gleamed amongst the boughs, incongruous and cruel, like a strident and mocking note in the solemn harmony of the doomed trees. - Joseph Conrad, Almayer's Folly, 1895 Malka's voice became more strident than ever. She had been anxious to make a species of vicarious reparation to her first husband, and the failure of Milly to acquiesce in the arrangement was a source of real vexation. - Israel Zangwill, Children of the Ghetto: A Study of a Peculiar People, 1892"	
peregrine	"noun 1. Foreign; alien; coming from abroad. 2. Wandering, traveling, or migrating. [Peregrine entered English in the late 1300s from the Latin peregrē literally meaning ""beyond the borders of the field.""] ""…an unmeasurable Profundity of Knowledge in the most peregrine and sublime Disciples…"" - Translated by Sir Thomas Urquhart and Peter Motteux, The Works of Mr. Francis Rabelais, Vol. 2, 1864 ""Salisbury Cathedral really is the ancestral home of the 'urban' peregrine, with records dating from the mid 1800s,"" he said. - ""Salisbury Cathedral spire peregrine falcon chicks hatch,"" BBC, 2014"	
reproof /ri-PROOF/	"noun Disapproval; blame. [From Old French reprover (to criticize), from Latin reprobare (to disapprove), from re- (opposite) + probare (to approve), from probus (good). Earliest documented use: 1375.] ""The nuns have continued to insist on their right to debate and challenge church teaching, which has resulted in the Vatican's reproof."" - Laurie Goodstein; Nuns Weigh Response to Scathing Vatican Rebuke; The New York Times; Jul 29, 2012."	
camarilla /kam-uh-RIL-uh, Spanish: kah-mah-REE-yah/	"noun A group of confidential scheming advisers. [From Spanish, diminutive of cámara (chamber), from Latin camera (room), from Greek kamara (an object with an arched cover). Earliest documented use: 1839.] ""In China ... successions to a bureaucratic collective leadership are managed by a tiny camarilla in a self-declared one-party state."" - Simon Sebag Montefiore; In Russia, Power Has No Heirs; The New York Times; Jan 11, 2009."	
scofflaw \SKAWF-law, SKOF-\	"noun 1. A person who flouts the law, especially one who fails to pay fines owed. 2. A person who flouts rules, conventions, or accepted practices. [Scofflaw is a portmanteau that describes a person who scoffs, or mocks, the law. It's been used in English since the 1920s.] “You don't want your kids growing up thinking you're a scofflaw, do you?"" - Janet Evanovich, Explosive Eighteen, 2011 When you go across the border at Nogales Arizona some very severe looking American guards, some of them pasty faced with sinister steelrim spectacles go scrounging through all your beat baggage for signs of the scorpion of scofflaw. - Jack Kerouac, Lonesome Traveler, 1960"	
toady /TOH-dee/	"noun A person who flatters or tries to please someone to gain favor. verb intr. To behave as a toady. [From shortening of toad-eater. In times past, a quack employed an assistant who ate (or pretended to eat) a poisonous toad and was supposedly cured by the quack's medicine. From there the word extended to a person who would do anything to curry favor. Earliest documented use: 1827.] ""Klein and the rest of Mission Control want a bunch of yes men and toadies."" - Martin Shoemaker; Murder on the Aldrin Express; Analog Science Fiction & Fact (New York); Sep 2013."	
rident \RAHYD-nt\	"adjective Laughing; smiling; cheerful. [Rident came to English in the early 1600s from the Latin rīdēre meaning ""to laugh.""] He flashed her a smile, but she didn't miss the fact that this rident expression did nothing to alter the bleakness in his eyes. - Elizabeth George, Deception on His Mind, 1997 Hetty was radiant and rident. It was quite like an evening at home at Oakhurst. Never for months past, never since that fatal cruel day, that no one spoke of, had they spent an evening so delightful. - William Makepeace Thackeray, The Virginians, 1857"	
proem /PRO-uhm, -em/	"noun An introduction, preface, or preamble. [From Old French proeme, from Latin prooemium, from Greek prooimion, from pro- (before) + oime (song). Earliest documented use: 1410.] ""However, if one carries on reading beyond the proem and carefully examines the main body ..."" - Eleni Kechagia; Plutarch Against Colotes; Oxford University Press; 2011."	
formicate /FOR-mi-kayt/	"verb intr. 1. To crawl like ants. 2. To swarm with ants. [From Latin formicare (to crawl like ants), from formica (ant). Earliest documented use: 1854.] ""Again, again, again, until you reach the inevitable conclusion of sky-rises, nuclear submarines, orbiting satellites, and Homo sapiens formicating the Earth."" - Laird Barron; Shiva, Open Your Eye; Fantasy & Science Fiction (Cornwall, Connecticut); Sep 2001."	
rounceval or rouncival /ROUN-si-vuhl/	"adjective Big or strong. noun Someone or something that is large. [From Roncesvalles, a town at the foot of the Pyrenees. It was the site of the Battle of Roncevaux Pass in 778 in which Roland, a commander of Charlemagne's army, was defeated by the Basques. Over time the story turned into a legend and giant bones of prehistoric animals discovered there were claimed to be those of heroes slain at the battle. Earliest documented use: 1570.] ""She was a big girl, a rouncival, Desroches called her."" Dolors Tool; Appetite for Murder; Breakwater Books; 2002. ""Gold ingots the size of rounceval peas, they say. Oh, and there's another curious aspect to the legend."" Louis Bayard; The School of Night; Henry Holt and Co.; 2010."	
pabulum /PAB-yuh-luhm/	"noun Bland intellectual fare: insipid or simplistic ideas, entertainment, writing, etc. [From Latin pabulum (food, fuel, fodder), from pascere (to feed). Ultimately from the Indo-European root pa- (to protect or feed), which also gave us food, foster, fodder, forage, pasture, pantry, and companion. Earliest documented use: 1661. Originally pabulum was something that nourished. During the 1920s, three Canadian pediatricians developed a bland, soft infant formula that was later marketed under the brand name Pablum and eventually the words pabulum/pablum came to refer to things simplistic or banal.] ""'This is not art,' I said. 'This is casual diversion, pabulum for the merchant class.'"" - Haim Watzman; Interzmezzo; The Jerusalem Report (Israel); Dec 19, 2011."	
restive /RES-tiv/	"adjective Restless, uneasy. [From Middle French rester (to remain), from Latin restare (to remain standing). Ultimately from the Indo-European root sta- (to stand), which is also the source of stay, stage, stable, instant, establish, static, system, stet and nihil obstat. Earliest documented use: 1549. Earlier the word meant refusing to go forward, as in a restive horse. Over time the word shifted in meaning and now it means the opposite. Instead of ""unable to advance"", now it means ""unable to remain still"".] ""The more than 500,000 small-scale coffee farmers are restive. Last month thousands marched though Manizales, the capital of the coffee-belt, demanding more government help and a shake-up of the federation."" - Bitter Grounds; The Economist (London, UK); Sep 15, 2012."	
inveigle /in-VAY-guhl, -VEE-/	"verb tr. To get something or to persuade someone to do something by deception or flattery. [From Old French aveugle (blind), from Latin ab- (away from) + oculus (eye). Earliest documented use: 1513.] ""The Internet has changed the way new late-night hosts inveigle their ways into the hearts of fans."" - Bill Carter; Familiar Night Bird Reclaims a Perch; The New York Times; Sep 9, 2013."	
prorogue /pro-ROHG/	"verb tr. 1. To discontinue a session of something, for example, a parliament. 2. To defer or to postpone. [From French proroger (to adjourn), from Latin prorogare (to prolong or defer), from pro- (before) + rogare (to ask). Ultimately from the Indo-European root reg- (to move in a straight line, to lead or rule), which is also the source of regime, direct, rectangle, erect, rectum, alert, source, and surge. Earliest documented use: 1419.] ""This sitting will be the last one before Parliament is prorogued."" - Lee U-Wen; Cost of Catching Sports on TV a Hot House Topic; The Business Times (Singapore); Apr 12, 2014."	
reprove /ri-PROOV/	"verb tr. To reprimand or censure. [From Latin reprobare (to disapprove), from re- (opposite) + probare (to approve), from probus (good). Earliest documented use: 1330.] ""The coroner then reproved them for their 'un-Englishman-like conduct'."" - Sandra Hempel; John St John Long; The Lancet (London, UK); May 3, 2014."	
degust /di-GUHST/	"verb tr. To taste or savor appreciatively. [From Latin degustare (to taste), from de- (completely) + gustare (to taste). Ultimately from the Indo-European root geus- (to taste or choose), which also gave us choice, choose, gusto, ragout, and disgust. Earliest documented use: 1623.] ""Within a decade, the first insects [beetles] crossed the western border of the Soviet Union to degust Ukrainian and Belarusan potatoes."" - Laura Williams; The Bug That Brought Russia to its Knees; Russian Life (Montpelier, Vermont); Jul/Aug 2007."	
consonance /KON-suh-nuhns/	"noun 1. Agreement or accord. 2. A combination of sounds pleasing to the ear. 3. The repetition of consonant sounds, especially at the ends of words, such as st in the phrase first and last. [Via French, from Latin con- (with) + sonare (to sound), from sonus (sound). Ultimately from the Indo-European root swen- (to sound), which also gave us sound, sonic, sonnet, sonata, and unison. Earliest documented use: 1430.] USAGE: ""Chin said the stance was in full consonance with the policy of the party."" - Jacob Achoi; SUPP Reconciliation 'Bright'; The Borneo Post (Malaysia); Mar 23, 2014. ""The show felt like the sweetest kind of chamber music, with perfectly satisfying intervals, cadences, rhythms; but to achieve that consonance, every part of the ensemble had to be just so."" - Hugh Laurie; Saying Goodbye to 'House'; Entertainment Weekly (New York); May 18, 2012. ""Despite the many decades that their lives overlapped and the consonance of their names, like the setup of a joke, Bruch and Bruckner have little in common."" - Zachary Woolfe; Come Together; The New York Times; Jan 11, 2013."	
scaramouch \SKAR-uh-mouch, -moosh\	"noun 1. (lowercase) A rascal or scamp. 2. A stock character in commedia dell'arte and farce who is a cowardly braggart, easily beaten and frightened. [Scaramouch entered English in the 1600s from the Italian scaramuccia literally meaning ""skirmish."" It is ultimately of Germanic origin.] …it seemed that the scaramouch in question had gained a wonderful ascendency over almost everybody in the Jeroboam. - Herman Melville, Moby Dick, 1851"	
vouchsafe /vouch-SAYF/	"verb tr. To grant or give something as if as a favor. verb intr. To condescend. [Via French, from Latin vocare (to call) + salvus (whole, intact). Earliest documented use: 1303.] ""Is Homo sapiens the only species vouchsafed to be in the afterlife club?"" - Jeremie Harris; Soul Searching: When Did We Become So Special?; Skeptic (Altadena, California); Issue 2, 2014."	
calvous \KAL-vuhs\	adjective Lacking all or most of the hair on the head; bald. [Calvous is derived from the New Latin word calvus meaning “bald.”] Admittedly most old, bloated, calvous Germans could double for me, and even if he hadn't been doppelganger material, with the beard I had started growing and the two black eyes, you'd need x-rays to spot the difference. - Tibor Fischer, The Thought Gang, 1994 All history proves it: the tyranny of the clergy was bad enough: but it was as nothing in comparison with the sordid tyranny of the Press which we now complacently tolerate. Calumny culminated with a concoction of the calvous Crowe's. - Frederick Rolfe, Hadrian the Seventh, 1904	
lus cogens	"Latin meaning ""compelling law."" This ""higher law"" must be followed by all countries. For example, genocide or slave trade may be considered to go against jus cogens, due to peremptory norms. The 1986 Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties affirmed jus cogens as an accepted doctrine in international law. States have used the concept of jus cogens in their efforts to achieve reforms in the existing law and international legal order. In international criminal law, jus cogens refers to the legal duties that arise in connection with high profile crimes, including the duty to prosecute or extradite, the non-applicability of statutes of limitations, the non-applicability of any immunities up to and including Heads of State, the non-applicability of the defense of ""obedience to superior orders"", and universal jurisdiction over perpetrators of such crimes."	
erga omnes	Erga omnes means in relation to all. The term is used to describe legal obligations and rights towards all. Erga omnes is used in property law. The right against trespass of a property can be enforced as against everyone. The term is in contradiction to contract law, where contract can be enforced only against a party to the contract and no other. International law applies the principle of erga omnes in certain cases. Some obligations are against all states. In some cases, defaulting state alone has obligation. However, certain states are entitled to invoke obligations erga omnes in proceedings before the International Court of Justice, and to take countermeasures in response to serious erga omnes breaches.	
macher /MAHKH-uhr/	"noun 1. A person of influence, one who gets things done. 2. A self-important overbearing person. [From Yiddish makher, from German macher (maker or doer). Earliest documented use: 1911.] ""They weren't all his ideas, but he -- he, Andrew Cuomo -- was the macher who'd do it."" - Scott Raab; The Perfect Prince of Cool; Esquire (New York); Nov 2000."	
lubricious /loo-BRISH-uhs/	"adjective 1. Lecherous. 2. Salacious. 3. Shifty or tricky. 4. Smooth and slippery. [From Latin lubricus (slippery, smooth). Ultimately from the Indo-European root sleubh- (to slide or slip), which also gave us slip, slop, sloop, sleeve, and lubricate. Earliest documented use: 1584.] ""The lubricious, often drooling Claudius himself, I reflect, would have been into full-body massage."" - Clive Irving; Ye Olde Dolce Vita; Condé Nast's Traveler (New York); Apr 2011. ""Ella Fitzgerald's rendition of 'Santa Claus Got Stuck in My Chimney' was so lubricious and dripping in double entendres that her record label feared to release it."" - Gerry Bowler; Santa Claus: A Biography; McClelland & Stewart; 2005."	
orgulous /OR-gyuh-luhs/	"adjective Haughty. [From Old French orguill (pride). Earliest documented use: 1275.] ""Behring was not too orgulous to ask for practical advice when in the spring of 1894 he had run into difficulties."" - Ulrike Klöppel; Enacting Cultural Boundaries; Science in Context (Cambridge, UK); Jun 2008."	
Ceteris paribus	"Ceteris paribus or ceterus paribus is a Latin phrase meaning ""with other things the same"" or ""all other things being equal or held constant"". A prediction or a statement about a causal, empirical, or logical relation between two states of affairs is ceteris paribus entails an acknowledgement that the prediction, although usually accurate in expected conditions, can fail or the relation can be abolished by intervening factors."	
refection /ri-FEK-shuhn/	"noun 1. Refreshment with food or drink. 2. A light meal. 3. The reingesting of fecal pellets, as practiced by rabbits. [Via French from Latin reficere (to renew or restore), from re- (back) + facere (to make). Earliest documented use: 1398.] ""Mr March and the Professor retired to the study, Meg and Amy went to look after the little refection of fruit and cake which was to come."" - Louisa May Alcott; Jo's Boys; Roberts Brothers; 1886."	
wonted /WON-tid/	"adjective Usual; accustomed. [From Middle English woned, wont (accustomed), past participle of wonen (to be used to, dwell). Ultimately from the Indo-European root wen- (to desire or to strive for), which is also the source of wish, win, Venus, overweening, venerate, venison, and banyan, venial, and ween. Earliest documented use: 1408.] ""With wonted grace, Carey concedes that mass hunger is a seemly matter for clerical concern."" - Matthew Norman; By George, Dr Carey's Right!; The Independent (London, UK); Feb 26, 2014."	
gleichschaltung /GLYK-shalt-toong/	"noun The forced standardization of political, economic, and cultural institutions, as in an authoritarian state. [From German gleichschalten (to bring into line), from gleich (same) + schalten (to switch, turn). The term was used by the Nazi regime for totalitarian control. Earliest documented use: 1933.] ""I think they will see them as a small part of a pattern of the destruction of the independence not only of the medical profession, but of all professions, that is part of the great bureaucratic Gleichschaltung of British society."" - Theodore Dalrymple; In Defence of David Southall; The Spectator (London, UK); Sep 6, 2008."	
cordate /KOR-dayt/	"adjective Heart-shaped. [From Latin cor (heart). Ultimately from the Indo-European root kerd- (heart), which also gave us cardiac, cordial, courage, record, concord, discord, and accord. Earliest documented use: 1651.] ""The cordate leaves were large and broad, and ended in a single point."" - Yann Martel; Life of Pi; Knopf; 2001."	
scandent /SKAN-duhnt/	"adjective Climbing or ascending. [From Latin scandere (to climb). Ultimately from the Indo-European root skand- (to leap or climb), which also gave us ascend, descend, condescend, transcend, echelon, and scale. Earliest documented use: 1682.] ""They come and vegetate -- early-goers and scandent socialites -- loitering about and small-talking on the pavement; gradually they edge indoors to the crawl of ivy and creeping plants, spreading like gossip through rooms and around corners."" - Kol; Fools; Xlibris; 2012."	
apricate /AP-ri-kayt/	verb intr.: To bask in the sun. verb tr. To expose to the sun. [From Latin apricari (to bask in the sun). Earliest documented use: 1691. Despite a similar spelling, the word apricot has a different origin. It’s from Latin praecox (early-ripening).] “I was also biting into that part of his body that must have been fairer than the rest because it never apricated.” - André Aciman; Call Me by Your Name; Picador; 2007.	
ascesis /uh-SEES-is/	noun The practice of severe self-discipline or self-control. Also spelled as askesis. [From Greek askesis (exercise or training), from askein (to exercise or work). Earliest documented use: 1873.] “There are many adults who develop a rigid black and white dress code as a form of ascesis.” - Galina Stolyarova; Local Queen of Fashion Releases Her Second Book; The St. Petersburg Times (Russia); Feb 8, 2012.	
senary /SEN-uh-ree/	adjective 1. Relating to the number six. 2. Having sixth rank. 3. Having six parts or things. [From Latin senarius (consisting of six). Ultimately from the Indo-European root s(w)eks (six), which also gave us semester, siesta, and Sistine (named after Pope Sixtus IV). Earliest documented use: 1661] “‘Your father married six wives. ... You talk of this scandal. How can it compare with your father’s senary adventure in matrimony?’” - Jean Plaidy; The Complete Tudors; Broadway Books; 2010.	
scurvy /SKUHR-vee/	adjective Mean or contemptible. noun A disease caused by vitamin C deficiency, characterized by swollen and bleeding gums, bleeding under the skin, and weakness. [From Old English scurf, probably from Old Norse. Ultimately from the Indo-European root sker- (cut), which also gave us decorticate, excoriate, hardscrabble, incarnadine, scrobiculate, and caruncle. Earliest documented use: 1529.] “When a scurvy band of outlaws rides up, Jake, to his surprise and certainly theirs, eliminates them in short order.” - Peter Rainer; Daniel Craig Stars in Cowboys & Aliens; The Christian Science Monitor (Boston, Massachusetts); Jul 29, 2011.	
Gethsemane /geth-SEM-uh-nee/	noun An instance or a place of suffering. [In the New Testament, Gethsemane was a garden near the Mount of Olives in Jerusalem, and the scene of Jesus’s agony and betrayal. Via Latin and Greek from Aramaic gat samne (oil press). Earliest documented use: 1901.] “She shared their troubles, and her courage and devotion provided a shield for them in the dark hours of their Gethsemane.” - Maude D. Petre; Alfred Loisy; Cambridge University Press; 2014.	
exordium /ig/eg-ZOR-dee-uhm, ik-SOR-l/	noun The beginning or introductory part of anything, especially of a discourse, treatise, etc. [From Latin ex- (out, from) + ordiri (to begin). Earliest documented use: 1531.] “Reading the OED ... is described in the author’s exordium with ‘I have read the OED so that you don’t have to.’” - William Safire; Presents of Mind; The New York Times Magazine; Jun 22, 2008.	
preternatural /pree/pri-tuhr-NACH-uh-ruhl/	adjective Beyond what is natural or normal. [From Latin praeter- (beyond, past) + naturam (nature). Earliest documented use: 1580.] “Ms. Yousafzai made a rapid recovery, and quickly drowned out her critics with her preternatural poise and speaking skills.” - Declan Walsh; Two Champions of Children Are Given Nobel Peace Prize; The New York Times; Oct 10, 2014.	
parastatal /par-uh-STAYT-l/	noun A company or agency owned wholly or partly by the government. adjective Relating to such an organization. [From Greek para- (beside) + state, from Latin status (condition). Earliest documented use: 1944.] “In South Africa, rising economic growth and poor government planning, critics say, have left Eskom, the country’s energy parastatal, scrambling to build new power plants.” - Joseph J. Schatz; Power Cuts Cripple Southern Africa; The Christian Science Monitor (Boston, Massachusetts); Jan 25, 2008. “State and parastatal staff also must contribute more to their pensions.” - Neil Behrmann; 2m British Civil Servants Walk Out; The Business Times (Singapore); Dec 1, 2011.	
apotropaic /ap-uh-truh-PEY-ik/	adjective Intended to ward off evil. [From Greek apotropaios turning away (evil), from apotrepein] Wright's aim was clearly apotropaic - to warn blacks off from anything suspected of white exploitation. These were apotropaic meaning they were intended to ward off evil.	
expectorate /ik-SPEK-tuh-rayt/	verb tr., intr. 1. To spit. 2. To eject by coughing. [From Latin expectorare (to expel from the chest), from ex- (out) + pectus (br east). Earliest documented use: 1601.] “Sportswriters and talk-radio hosts may expectorate their opinions like gobs of tobacco juice.” - James Wolcott; Breakdown of Champions; Vanity Fair (New York); Apr 2013.	
placentious /pla-SEN-shus/	adjective Pleasing or inclined to please. [From Latin placentia (pleasantness), from placere (to please). Earliest documented use: 1661.] “[John Walbye was] a placentious person, gaining the good-will of all with whom he conversed, being also ingenious, industrious, learned, eloquent, pious, and prudent.” - Thomas Fuller; The History of the Worthies of England; T. Tegg; 1840.	
autochthon /o-TOK-thun/	noun 1. A native; an aborigine. 2. Something, as a rock, formed or originating in the place where found. [From Greek autochthon (of the land itself), from auto- (self) + chthon (earth, land). Ultimately from the Indo-European root dhghem- (earth), which also sprouted human, homicide, humble, homage, chamomile, exhume, inhume, chthonic, disinter, chameleonic, and Persian zamindar (landholder). Earliest documented use: 1538. The opposite of this term is allochthon.] “A Bavarian autochthon, Werner Herzog has been a passionate imagemaker since the early 1960s.” - Tom Webber; The Dream Weaver; New Statesman (London, UK); Feb 13, 2006.	
festinate /verb: FES-tuh-nayt, adjective: -nayt, -nit/	verb tr., intr. To hurry or hasten. adjective Hurried or hasty. [From Latin festinare (to hasten). Earliest documented use: 1616.] “We will not delay discussing the budget, but will not festinate it either.” - Commission to Accelerate; Dominican Today (Santo Domingo); Dec 30, 2005.	
saturnine /SAT-uhr-nyn/	adjective 1. Sluggish. 2. Gloomy. 3. Cold. [From Latin Saturninus (of Saturn). From the ancient belief in astrology that those born under the planet Saturn’s supposed influence had its characteristics. Since Saturn was the farthest known planet at the time, it was believed to be the slowest and coldest. The planet received its name after the Roman god of agriculture. Earliest documented use: 1433.] “This saturnine assessment of the world’s economic predicament has been whispered about in worried tones for months now in the world of high finance.” - Felix Martin; Real Money; New Statesman (London, UK); Oct 17, 2014.	
Ichor (EYE-core), petrichor and vellichor	"Ichor is the stuff that was said to flow in the veins of the Greek gods in place of blood; Petrichor is the distinctive and pleasant smell that can accompany rain falling on ground baked dry. Vellichor is the distinctive and melancholy sight and smell of old books, redolent of dust and decayed hopes. [From petro- (rock), from Greek petros (stone) + ichor (the fluid that is supposed to flow in the veins of the gods in Greek mythology). Coined by researchers I.J. Bear and R.G. Thomas.] ""Petrichor, the name for the smell of rain on dry ground, is from oils given off by vegetation, absorbed onto neighboring surfaces, and released into the air after a first rain."" - Matthew Bettelheim; Nature's Laboratory; Shasta Parent (Mt Shasta, California); Jan 2002. ""But, even in the other pieces, her prose breaks into passages of lyrical beauty that come as a sorely needed revivifying petrichor amid the pitiless glare of callousness and cruelty."" - Pradip Bhattacharya; Forest Interludes; Indianest.com; Jul 29, 2001."	
ensorcell /en-SAWR-sel/	"verb To bewitch, enchant. [From Middle French ensorceler, from Old French ensorcerer, from en- + -sorcerer, from Old French sorcier, from Vulgar Latin sortiarius, from Latin sort-, stem of sors (lot, fate).] ""Pritchett is determined to beguile, even to ensorcell his reader."" - Richard Howard; V.S. Pritchett: The Seduction Of Criticism; The Washington Post; Jun 14, 1992."	
expurgate /EK-spuhr-gayt/	verb To remove parts considered objectionable. [From Latin expurgare (to purge), from ex- (out) + purgare (to cleanse). Earliest documented use: 1621.] “The titles [displayed during the Banned Book Week] include The Odyssey by Homer, which Plato suggested expurgating for immature readers and which Caligula tried to suppress because it expressed Greek ideals of freedom.” - News/Community Briefs; Oakland Tribune (California); Oct 1, 2009.	
lissome [LIS-uhm] lissom	adjective Agile; graceful. [Alteration of lithesome, from Old English lithe (flexible, mild) + -some (having a particular quality). Earliest documented use: 1800.] “Jorjie, still a comparatively lissom 13 stone, fills that niggling gap between lunch and dinner with two Mars Bars melted over a bowl of ice cream and Adam (19 stone) consumes 28 litres of fizzy drinks a week. Their parents, with one honourable exception, seem to regard these excesses as an intractable natural mystery.” - Thomas Sutcliffe; Last Night’s TV; The Independent (London, UK); Apr 5, 2007. “Gyorgy Faludy dumped Eric for a lissom poetess more than 60 years his junior.” - Gyorgy Faludy; The Economist (London, UK); Sep 14, 2006.	
lithe [LAHyth]	adjective, lither, lithest. Bending readily; pliant; limber; supple; flexible [before 900; Middle English lith (e), Old English līthe; cognate with Old Saxon līthi, German lind mild, Latin lentus slow] The lithe body of a ballerina.	
ascetic /uh-SET-ik/	adjective Practicing severe self-discipline or self-denial. noun One who practices severe self-discipline or self-denial. [From Greek askesis (exercise or training), from askein (to exercise or work). Earliest documented use: 1646.] “This exhibition of roughly 50 paintings lays out the magpie path that took Mondrian from stolid burgher to ascetic modernist.” - Michael Prodger; From Windmills to Modernism; New Statesman (London, UK); May 30, 2014.	
hermeneutic /hur-muh-NOO-tik, -NYOO-/	"adjective Interpretive or explanatory. [From Greek hermeneutikos (of interpreting), from hermeneuein (to interpret), from hermeneus (interpreter). After Hermes in Greek mythology, who served as a messenger and herald for other gods, and who himself was the god of eloquence, commerce, invention, cunning, and theft.] ""Musically, the soundtrack is a trashy genre-fest that provokes a kind of hermeneutic overload. Is it for a horror film, a B-grade sci-fi, a masterpiece of Soviet cinema? Or a kung-fu flick, a western, or a gangster movie?"" - Cameron Woodhead; The Session; The Age (Melbourne, Australia); Jun 19, 2006. hermeneutics noun (functioning as sing) 1. The science of interpretation, esp of Scripture. 2. The branch of theology that deals with the principles and methodology of exegesis. 3. philosophy The study and interpretation of human behaviour and social institutions. In existentialist thought, the discussion of the purpose of life. It is called application hermeneutics, meaning that you know in advance who are supposed to be the good ones and who the bad ones. One way of viewing serialism is to see it as a sort of giant affective device in the hermeneutics of modern music. In so doing, it has always favored philology and archaeology, all the while avoiding the more capacious domain of hermeneutics."	
astringent /uh-STRIN-juhnt/	adjective 1. Contracting or constricting. 2. Caustic; pungent. 3. Stern; austere. noun A substance that constricts body tissues. [From Latin astringere (to bind fast), from ad- (toward) + stringere (to bind). Ultimately from the Indo-European root streig- (to stroke or press), which is also the source of strike, streak, strict, stress, strain, and strait. Earliest documented use: 1541.] “However, unlike the apple and its other cousin the pear, quince flesh is hard and astringent and cannot be eaten raw.” - Jan Bilton; Quinces, the Perfect Accompaniments; Hawke’s Bay Today (New Zealand); Apr 25, 2014. “Young Ajay Mishra, whose family carries with it a wound that will not heal, reads Ernest Hemingway and finds in that astringent language a way out.” - Amrita Dutta; Remains of the Day; The Indian Express (New Delhi); May 10, 2014.	
heimisch or heimish or haimish /HAY-mish, HY-/	adjective Homey; unpretentious. [From Yiddish heymish (domestic), from Old High German heim (home). Ultimately from the Indo-European root tkei- (to settle or dwell), which also gave us home, haunt, hangar, site, situate, and hamlet. Earliest documented use: 1964.] “Most of his deal-making takes place over the heimisch cuisine of Gilda.” - Spencer Bright; Michael Levy; The Guardian (London, UK); Aug 18, 1997.	
devolve /di-VOLV/	verb tr., intr. To transfer or be passed (duties, rights, powers, etc.) on to another. verb intr. To deteriorate or degenerate. [From Latin devolvere (to roll down), from de- (down) + volvere (to roll). Ultimately from the Indo-European root wel- (to turn or roll), which also gave us waltz, revolve, valley, walk, vault, volume, wallet, helix, and voluble. Earliest documented use: 1420.] “Indonesia has devolved much authority to local government.” - Fanfare for the Common Man; The Economist (London, UK); Jul 26, 2014. “The event devolved into violence on both sides.” - Nick Pinto; The Point of Order; The New York Times Magazine; Jan 18, 2015.	
spaniel /SPAN-yuhl/	noun 1. A submissive or fawning person. 2. Any of several breeds of small to medium-sized dogs with long drooping ears and a silky coat. [From Old French espaignol/espaigneul (Spanish dog), from Hispaniolus (Spanish), from Hispania (Spain). Earliest documented use: 1386.] “Helena: I am your spaniel. And, Demetrius, The more you beat me, I will fawn on you.” - William Shakespeare; A Midsummer Night’s Dream; 1590s.	
turbid /TUHR-bid/	adjective 1. Unclear; opaque. 2. Dark or dense, as smog or clouds. 3. Confused or muddled. [From Latin turba (turmoil, crowd). Earliest documented use: 1626. Not to be confused with turgid.] “But by the turbid standards of corporate Africa, the company is clean.” - Africa Calling; The Economist (London, UK); Jun 5, 2008.	
shofar \SHOH-far\	noun A ram's-horn trumpet blown by the ancient Hebrews in battle and during religious observances and used in modern Judaism especially during Rosh Hashanah and at the end of Yom Kippur. [One of the shofar's original uses was to proclaim the Jubilee year (a year of emancipation of Hebrew slaves and restoration of alienated lands to their former owners) or the anointing of a new king. Today, it is mainly used in synagogues during the High Holy Days. It is blown during the month of Elul (the 12th month of the civil year or the 6th month of the ecclesiastical year in the Jewish calendar) until the end of Rosh Hashanah and again at the end of the last service on Yom Kippur as reminders to attend to spiritual matters. The custom is to sound the shofar in broken notes resembling sobbing and wailing followed by a long unbroken sound.]	
morganatic \mor-guh-NAT-ik\	"adjective Of, relating to, or being a marriage between a member of a royal or noble family and a person of inferior rank, in which the rank of the inferior partner remains unchanged and the children of the marriage do not succeed to the titles, fiefs, or entailed property of the partner of higher rank. [The deprivations imposed on the lower-ranking spouse by a morganatic marriage may seem like a royal pain in the neck, and yet the word ""morganatic"" comes from a word for a marriage benefit. New Latin ""morganatica,"" a term based on Middle High German's ""morgen"" (""morning""), means ""morning gift."" It refers to a gift that a new husband traditionally gave to his bride on the morning after the consummation of their marriage. So why was the New Latin phrase ""matrimonium ad morganaticam,"" which means literally ""marriage with morning gift,"" the term for a morganatic marriage? Because it was just that — the wife got the morning gift, but that's all she was entitled to of her husband's possessions.] ""Nicholas [Sheremetev] was severely punished by society and his friends for his morganatic marriage, which was regarded as class treason."" - Simon Sebag; The Serf Who Married Her Owner; The Telegraph (London, UK); Jun 20, 2008."	
recusant \RECK-yuh-zunt\	"adjective Refusing to submit to authority. [In 1534, Henry VIII of England declared himself the head of the Church of England, separating it from the Roman Catholic Church, and the resultant furor led to increased attention focused on people's religious observances. A ""recusant"" was someone who (from about 1570-1791) refused to attend services of the Church of England, and therefore violated the laws of mandatory church attendance. The word derives from the Latin verb ""recusare,"" meaning ""reject"" or ""oppose."" The adjective ""recusant"" has been in use since the early 17th century. Originally, it meant ""refusing to attend the services of the Church of England,"" but by the century's end, both the adjective and the noun were also being used generally to suggest resistance to authority of any form.] ""The 'recusant Republican senators' who defied their party and 'tipped the balance in favor of Johnson' won praise from Rehnquist for putting principle above politics."" - Gaylord Shaw; Portrait of a Trial, Newsday (New York); Jan 5, 1999."	
alameda \al-uh-MEE-duh\	"noun A public promenade bordered with trees. [Residents of the American Southwest may remember the ""álamo"" in ""alameda."" This ""álamo"" is not the 18th-century Franciscan mission that was the site of a key battle in the fight for Texas independence, however, but the Spanish name for the poplar tree (the mission, the Alamo in San Antonio, Texas, was named for the trees that grew near it). Spanish speakers used ""álamo"" as the basis for their word ""alameda,"" which can name either a grove of poplars or a tree-lined avenue. English speakers found ""alameda"" so appropriate for a shady public promenade that they borrowed it as a generic term in the late 1700s. And yes, the Spanish ""alameda"" and nearby poplar trees also contributed to the naming of the city of Alameda, California.]"	
eristic \ih-RISS-tik\	"adjective Characterized by disputatious and often subtle and specious reasoning. noun 1. One who engages in arguments or disputes; a controversialist. 2. The art of disputation. [""Eristic"" means ""argumentative"" as well as logically invalid, and someone prone to eristic arguments probably causes a fair amount of strife amongst his or her conversational partners. It's no surprise, then, that the word traces its ancestry back to the Greek word for ""strife."" ""Eristic"" and the variant ""eristical"" come from the Greek ""eristikos,"" meaning ""fond of wrangling,"" from ""erizein,"" ""to wrangle,"" and ultimately from ""eris,"" which means ""strife."" The adjective appeared in print in English in 1637, and was followed approximately 20 years later by the noun ""eristic,"" which refers to either a person who is skilled at debates based on formal logic or to the art or practice of argument.] ""Finally, Truth and Progress exhibits both the dazzle and idiosyncrasy of Rorty's literary style and eristic habits--the sharp insider wit, the hyperactive thumb-nailing of other thinkers to hawk fresh images of their thought ..."" - Carlin Romano; Books & the Arts: Rortyism for Beginners; The Nation (New York); Jul 27, 1998. ""Endlessly questioning nuances of meaning in front of exasperated colleagues, or calling attention to inappropriate administrative power, might make you the star of the show in Plato's Academy or Aristotle's Lyceum. But is that too obnoxiously eristic for the faculty meeting, a ritual most characterized by the common desire of its participants to see it end promptly, so everyone can go home and forget about disliked colleagues?"" - Carlin Romano; On Collegiality, College Style; The Chronicle of Higher Education (Washington, DC); May 26, 2000."	
lord of misrule \lord-uv-mis-ROOL\	"noun A master of Christmas revels in England especially in the 15th and 16th centuries. [Late in the medieval days of England, the royal court, the houses of noblemen, and many colleges at the universities of Cambridge and Oxford appointed a manager for their Christmas festivities and dubbed him the ""lord of misrule"" or the ""abbot of misrule."" The lord of misrule was responsible for arranging all Christmas entertainment, including plays, processions, and feasts. The lord himself usually presided over these affairs with a mock court and received comic homage from the revelers. Scholars believe that the name ""lord of misrule"" was taken from the name of the official who presided over an older New Year's celebration called the ""Feast of Fools.""]"	
pastiche \pass-TEESH\	"noun A literary, artistic, musical, or architectural work that imitates the style or is made up of selections from different works; potpourri. [It all began with macaroni. Our word ""pastiche"" is from French, but the French word was in turn borrowed from Italian, where the word is ""pasticcio."" ""Pasticcio"" is what the Italians called a kind of ""macaroni pie"" (from the word ""pasta""). English-speakers familiar with this multilayered dish had begun to apply the name to various sorts of potpourris or hodgepodges (musical, literary, or otherwise) by the 18th century. For over a hundred years we were happy with ""pasticcio,"" until we discovered the French word ""pastiche"" sometime in the latter part of the 1800s. Although we still occasionally use ""pasticcio"" in its extended meaning, ""pastiche"" is now much more common.] ""The majority's reading ... unduly emphasizes the concurring opinion by two justices, and it engrafts onto the plurality and concurring opinions selected statements from the dissent. Then, to hold this pastiche together, it overrules ... well-established Massachusetts law."" - Excerpt from concurring opinion (Selya, J.) in Redgrave v. Boston Symphony Orchestra, Inc., 1988."	
couloir \kool-WAHR\	"noun A steep mountainside gorge. [""Couloir"" entered English in the 19th century from French, where it literally means ""passage."" The term was originally applied specifically to steep gorges in the Alps and later to similar gorges elsewhere, especially ones used by skiers as passages down mountains. Because of their narrowness and steepness, couloirs can be dangerous terrain even for expert skiers. In fact, journalist Jim Kochevar, writing of his experiences at the Telluride ski area for the Chicago Tribune in October 1997, declared (tongue in cheek) that ""Couloir is French for 'cold, narrow place to die.'""] ""The nearby Mont Blanc tunnel provides an easy way through the heart of the Alps, which allows us to challenge ourselves in Switzerland on Verbier's couloirs and bowls."" - Liane Beam Wansbrough; Joie de Ski in Chamonix; The Globe and Mail (Toronto, Canada); Jan 26, 2005. ""Standing at the top of a vertiginous couloir above Zermatt, the multi-choice business option is a familiar one for an investment banker used to taking momentous decisions under pressure."" - Felice Hardy; Time to Get Out of the Bored Room; Evening Standard (London, UK); Feb 1, 2005."	
resipiscent /re-si-PIS-uhnt/	"adjective Having returned to a saner mind. [From Latin resipiscere (to recover one's senses), from re- (again) + sapere (to taste, to know). Ultimately from Indo-European root sep- (to taste or perceive) that is also the source of sage, savant, savvy, savor, sapid, sapient, and insipid.] ""I am a recidivist, frequently guilty of overwriting and overciting. But I am at least a resipiscent recidivist. I have come around to the view that, though it may take discipline to cut more quickly to the chase and to doff the security blanket that writers weave from string citations, we, as judges, must dedicate ourselves to the task."" - Excerpt from Hon. Bruce M. Selya; In Search of Less; Texas Law Review; Volume 74, 1996."	
haboob /huh-BOOB/	"noun A violent dust storm or sandstorm, especially in Sudan. [From Arabic habub (strong wind).] ""What appellant labors to portray as a robust haboob is not even a gentle zephyr. The house, we think, is sturdy enough to withstand the prevailing winds."" - Excerpt from opinion of the court (Selya, J.) in Aoude v. Mobil Oil Corp. 1988."	
aposematic /ap-uh-suh-MAT-ik/	"adjective Serving as a warning or alarm. [From Greek apo- (away, off) + sematic (serving as a sign of danger), from sema (sign). The term is especially used in case of insects, referring to features such as bright colors or markings to warn a predator that they may be poisonous.] ""Winslow departed port in utter disregard of an aposematic forecast, and then stayed overlong in worsening seas before turning back."" - Excerpt from opinion of the court (Selya, J.) in DiMillo v. Sheepscot Pilots, Inc. 1989."	
athenaeum /ath-uh-NEE-um/	"noun 1. A library or reading room. 2. A literary or scientific club. [From Latin Athenaeum, from Greek Athenaion, a temple of Athena, the goddess of wisdom.] ""Whole wings of libraries could be built around the literature of loss ... The Summer After June, Ashley Warlick's second novel, belongs in that vast annex of the athenaeum reserved solely for stories of mourning."" - Chris Bohjalian; Starting Over; The Washington Post; Apr 2, 2000."	
hesternal /heh-STER-nuhl/	"adjective Of yesterday. [From Latin hesternus (of yesterday). Also see nudiustertian (relating to the day before yesterday) hodiernal (relating to today).] ""I passed up a side-street, one of those deserted ways ... dim places, fusty with hesternal excitements and the thrills of yesteryear."" - Rupert Brooke; Letters From America; Sidgwick & Jackson; 1971."	
sipid /SIP-id/	"adjective Having a pleasing taste or flavor. [Back formation from insipid, from Late Latin insipidus, from in- (not) + sapidus (savory), from sapere (to taste, to know). Ultimately from Indo-European root sep- (to taste or perceive) that is also the source of sage, savant, savvy, savor, sapid, sapient, and insipid.] ""CBS adds two new comedies to the mix this year, moving the insipid 'Major Dad' to Friday nights to make room for John Ritter and Markie Post in the slightly more sipid 'Hearts Afire'."" - Ed Siegel; Monday: CBS is the Ticket; Boston Globe; Sep 14, 1992."	
connate /KON-ayt, ko-NAYT/	adjective 1. Congenial. 2. Congenital. [From Latin connasci (to be born with), from com- (with) nasci (to be born). Earliest documented use: 1641.] “In the wilderness, I find something more dear and connate than in streets and villages.” - Ralph Waldo Emerson; Nature; 1836. “Zyuganov had a connate sense of how to convince subjects.” - Jason Matthews; Red Sparrow; Simon & Schuster; 2013.	
accidence /AK-si-dens/	noun 1. The fundamentals of any subject. 2. The branch of grammar dealing with inflections of words. 3. A book of fundamentals of a subject. [From Latin accidentia (from Latin accidens), from accidere (to happen), from ad- (toward) + cadere (to fall). Ultimately from the Indo-European root kad- (to fall), which is also the source of cadence, cascade, casualty, cadaver, chance, chute, accident, occident, decay, recidivism, perchance, casuistry. Earliest documented use: 1434.] “He flicked through the accidence, and closed it with a smile of accomplishment.” - Geraldine Brooks; Caleb’s Crossing; Viking; 2011.	
stygian /STIJ-ee-uhn/	adjective 1. Dark or gloomy. 2. Hellish. 3. Unbreakable or completely binding (said of an oath). 4. Relating to the river Styx. [In Greek mythology Styx was a river in the underworld over which souls of the dead were ferried by Charon (after whom Pluto’s largest moon is named). Styx was also the river by which oaths were sworn that even gods were afraid to break. The word is from Latin Stygius, from Greek Stygios, from Styx (the hateful). Earliest documented use: 1566.] “And forget about walking into the stygian darkness of the basement.” - Joseph Xavier Martin; Dad’s Spooky Stories Brought Chills, Thrills; Buffalo News (New York); Jul 1, 2015. “They laboured in Stygian conditions, which would not be tolerated now.” - Gay Byrne; Voices from the Old Schoolyard; Sunday Business Post (Cork, Ireland); Apr 5, 2015.	
maven /MAY-vuhn/	"noun An expert, connoisseur, or enthusiast. [From Yiddish meyvn, from Hebrew mebhin (one who understands).] ""The panelists are a who's who of television and film mavens."" - James Adams; TV Networks Can Relax; The Globe and Mail (Toronto, Canada); Jun 12, 2006."	
manna /MAN-uh/	noun An unexpected help, benefit, or advantage. [Via Latin and Greek from Hebew man (manna). In the Bible manna was the food supplied to the Israelites by the heavens during their wandering in the desert. Earliest documented use: mid 5th century.] “The people, also, must accept this new mantra and not expect manna to fall from the tables of their representatives in the government.” - Are Nigerians Ready for the Real ‘Change’?; The Sun (Lagos, Nigeria); Apr 22, 2015.	
gehenna /gi-HEN-uh/	noun 1. Hell. 2. Any place of extreme torture or suffering. [From Latin gehenna, from Greek Geenna, from Hebrew ge-hinnom (hell), literally, the valley of Hinnom, or from ge ben Hinnom (valley of the son of Hinnom). It’s not clear who this Hinnom fellow was. In the Bible, the valley was known as a place of child sacrifice. Ultimately, this word is from the same Semitic root that gave Arabic jahannam (hell) which, in Hindi, became jahannum. Earliest documented use: 1594.] “We lived peacefully and happily, but now our house has turned into a Gehenna.” - Isaac Metzker; A Bintel Brief; Doubleday; 1971. “Just as I was preparing to set the back deck on fire to get some warmth in the house, all Gehenna broke loose on the news.” - Today’s Advice; Kennebec Journal (Augusta, Maine); Feb 9, 2013.	
micturate /MIK-chuh-rayt, MIK-tuh-/	verb intr. To urinate. [From Latin micturire (to want to urinate), from meiere (to urinate). Ultimately from the Indo-European root meigh- (to urinate), which also gave us mist, thrush, and mistletoe. Earliest documented use: 1842.] “Michael Owen, formerly a soccer player, will not spend a penny unnecessarily. ‘Don’t care how much I’m bursting,’ he tweets, ‘I refuse to pay 20p to have a wee at a train station.’ One applauds his thriftiness while simultaneously wondering what he does in the circumstances to relieve himself. One also wonders when he found himself in this frightful situation. When last I needed to micturate on railway premises, the going rate was an inflation-busting, wallet-hammering 30p.” - Alan Taylor; How Would Rabbie Burns Vote in the Referendum?; Sunday Herald (Glasgow, Scotland); Feb 9, 2014.	
masticate /MAS-ti-kayt/	verb tr., intr. 1. To chew. 2. To reduce to pulp by crushing and grinding. [From Latin masticare (to chew), from Greek mastikhan (to gnash the teeth). Earliest documented use: 1562. A synonym of this word is fletcherize.] “Don’t chew with mouth open: Thy beauty causeth every head to turn. Thy comeliness could launch a thousand ships. But suitors will be few till thou dost learn To masticate with firmly closed lips. (Nan Reiner, Alexandria)” - Pat Myers; Rhymes & Misdemeanors; The Washington Post; Jun 14, 2015. “Ansari helpfully masticates their findings down for a general audience.” - Helen Lewis; Modern Romance by Aziz Ansari review; The Guardian (London, UK); Jun 4, 2015.	
saturnalia /sat-uhr-NAY-lee-uh/	noun A time of unrestrained revelry. [From Latin Saturnalia (relating to Saturn). In ancient Rome, Saturnalia was a festival organized in honor of the Roman god Saturn who also gave his name to the planet Saturn. Earliest documented use: 1591. Also see saturnine and saturnian.] “It is a sort of holiday, a saturnalia, a time of licence when restrictions on liberty can be cast aside.” - Allan Massie; Rioters Just Want Excitement -- and New Trainers; The Scotsman (Edinburgh, Scotland); Aug 10, 2011.	
venery /VEN-uh-ree/	noun 1. The practice or pursuit of sexual pleasure. 2. Hunting. [For 1: From Latin veneria, from venus (desire, love). Venus was the goddess of love and beauty in Roman mythology who gave her name to the planet Venus. Earliest documented use: 1497. For 2: From Old French venerie, from vener (to hunt). Earliest documented use: 1330. In olden times one was supposed to know the terms of venery. Ultimately both senses are from the Indo-European root wen- (to desire or to strive for), which is also the source of wish, win, overweening, venerate, venison, banyan, wonted, venial, and ween. Earliest documented use: 1330.] “Rarely use venery but for health or offspring, never to dullness, weakness, or the injury of your own or another’s peace or reputation.” - Benjamin Franklin; The Autobiography of Benjamin Franklin; J. Parsons; 1793. “In those days true dedication to venery meant having your own hunting pack.” - Philip Bowern; Hunting the Hills of Devon; The Western Morning News (Plymouth, UK); Dec 17, 2012.	
athwart /uh-THWART/	adverb, preposition From side to side of; across; against. [From a- (on, into, toward) + thwart, from Old Norse thvert, neuter of thverr (transverse). Earliest documented use: 1470.] “He shuffled athwart, keeping one eye ahead vigilantly.” - Joseph Conrad; Heart of Darkness; Blackwood’s Magazine; 1899.	
Lorelei /LOR-uh-ly/	noun A dangerously seductive woman. [In German legend Lorelei was a nymph who sat on a rock of the same name on the Rhine river. Her songs lured sailors to their destruction on the rock. Earliest documented use: 1878. Also see siren, Mata Hari, and Circe.] “In fact, Peter the Publican’s daughter is his Lorelei, enticing customers into his establishment, then flirting brazenly just to keep them drinking.” - Michael Dirda; These Dead Men Don’t Just Tell Tales, They Quarrel. A Lot; The Washington Post; Apr 9, 2015.	
Circe /SUR-see/	"noun An irresistibly charming woman. [After Circe, an enchantress in Greek mythology. She was known to lure sailors to her island and turn them into swine.] ""In Giuseppe Tornatore's new film, Malena, the Italian actress Monica Bellucci plays a heroine who is every man's dream and every woman's nightmare. The young and gorgeous Malena Scordia, who is marooned in her husband's village in Sicily when he goes off to the second world war, is an unwitting Circe, driving men to lust and their wives to plot revenge."" - Laura Winters; Arts: Part Siren, Part Muse, All Trouble; The Guardian (London, UK). Mar 5, 2001."	
Mata Hari /MA-tuh HAR-ee, MAT-uh HAR-ee/	"noun A seductive woman who works as a spy. [After exotic dancer Mata Hari, a stage name of Margaretha Geertruida Zelle (1876-1917). She was a Dutch woman, who took a Malay name, allegedly spied for the Germans, and was executed by the French. Her stage name Mata Hari means sun, literally ""eye of the day"", from Malay mata (eye) + hari (day, dawn). Earliest documented use: 1936.] ""In London, Sophia joins the war effort ... and embarks upon improbable espionage escapades, hoping to come off as a Mata Hari in furs and printed chiffon."" - Liesl Schillinger; The Persistence of Levity; Newsweek (New York); Sep 20, 2013."	
threnody /THREN-uh-dee/	"noun A song of lamentation for the dead. [From Greek threnoidia, from threnos (lament) + oide (song). Ultimately from Indo-European root wed- (to speak) that is also the forefather of such words as ode, tragedy, comedy, parody, melody, and rhapsody.] ""In his new novel James Lee Burke ties all these elements together in what amounts to a threnody of grief for the American dream."" - Mike Phillips; Both Villains And Victims; The Guardian (London, UK); Jul 31, 2004. ""For Dorin, it was a full-throated threnody of decision."" - Jerry Izenberg; A Jersey Hero Hits Home; The Star-Ledger (Newark, New Jersey); Jul 25, 2004."	
pall /PAWL/	"noun 1. A cloth, often of velvet, for spreading over a coffin, bier, or tomb. 2. A coffin. 3. Anything that covers, shrouds, or overspreads, especially with darkness or gloom. 4. Ecclesiastical. Pallium (i.e. an altar cloth or a linen cloth or a square cloth-covered piece of cardboard used to cover a chalice). [before 900; Middle English; Old English pæll pope's pallium < Latin pallium cloak] ""A spate of House retirements in the South is casting a pall over Dems' 2010 chances."" - Buck Up, Democrats, Benjamin Sarlin, January 26, 2010"	
beleaguer /bi-LEE-guhr/	verb tr. 1. To surround with troops. 2. To beset with difficulties. [From Dutch belegeren (to camp around), from be- (around) + leger (camp). Ultimately from the Indo-European root legh- (to lie or lay), which also gave us lie, lay, lair, fellow, and laager. Earliest documented use: 1589.] “Underlying tensions and unresolved issues continue to beleaguer the Blue Line area.” - In Lebanon, UN Official Urges ‘Calm, Restraint’ Along Blue Line; Asia News Monitor (Bangkok, Thailand); Feb 19, 2015.	
Lothario /lo-THAR-ee-o/	noun A man who indiscriminately seduces women. [While the word was popularized after Lothario, a character in the play The Fair Penitent (1703), it first appeared in Don Quixote in which nobleman Anselmo tests his wife’s fidelity by recruiting his friend Lothario to seduce her. Earliest documented use: 1756.] “Chad Everett played an aging lothario who engages in a steamy audition with a young ingenue.” - People; Bozeman Daily Chronicle (Montana); Jul 25, 2012.	
doryphore /DOR-uh-for/	noun A pedantic or persistent critic. [From French doryphore (Colorado beetle, a potato pest), from Greek doruphoros (spear carrier). The author Harold Nicolson brought the word to English in its current sense. Earliest documented use: 1952.] “Do you wind everyone up because you are nothing more than a doryphore?” - Tom Whitehead; Doryphores Must Keep Away from Dinner Parties; The Scotsman (Edinburgh, Scotland); Oct 25, 2001.	
winkle /WING-kuhl/	noun A periwinkle, any of various mollusks with a spiral shell. verb tr. To extract with effort or difficulty. [For noun: Of uncertain origin. For verb: From the process of extracting a periwinkle from its shell with a pin for eating its meat. Earliest documented use: 1585.] Dougherty is a smart, pragmatic but deep-thinking cop who winkles out the truth by virtue of dogged police work.” - Declan Burke; Intricate Confessions, Historic Skeletons, Heartbreaking Tragedy; Irish Times (Dublin); Aug 29, 2015.	
kenning /KEN-ing/	noun A figurative, usually compound, expression used to describe something. For example, 'whale road' for an ocean and 'oar steed' for a ship. [From Old Norse kenna (to know). Ultimately from the Indo-European root gno- (to know), which is also the source of know, recognize, acquaint, ignore, diagnosis, notice, normal, prosopagnosia, gnomon, anagnorisis, and agnosia. Earliest documented use: 1320. Kennings were used especially in Old Norse and Old English poetry.] “The hero, Beewolf (a kenning for bear, named the ‘bee wolf’ for its plundering of hives), heads to the Golden Hall.” - John Garth; Monster Munch; New Statesman (London, UK); May 30, 2014. “In the dawn of the English language the earliest poets or scops invented words like ‘battleflash’ to describe a sword, or they would identify a boat by its function with a kenning like ‘wave-skimmer’.” - Samuel Hazo; What’s in a Name?; Pittsburgh Post-Gazette; Feb 17, 2008.	
guff /guf/	noun 1. Nonsense. 2. Insolent talk. [Perhaps imitative. Earliest documented use: 1825.] “Management literature is full of guff about how entrepreneurs should embrace failure as a ‘learning experience’. But being punched in the face is also a learning experience.” - Entrepreneurs Anonymous; The Economist (London, UK); Sep 20, 2014.	
gannet /GAN-it/	"noun 1. A large seabird known for catching fish by diving from a height. 2. A greedy person. [From Old English ganot. Ultimately from the Indo-European root ghans- (goose), which also gave us goose, gosling, gander, and gunsel. Earliest documented use: before 1000. Gannets’ reputation for being greedy isn’t deserved though. See here.] “Michael Buerk -- I am afraid there is no delicate way to put this -- is a gannet. He steals the very food from your plate. I recall one meal when he had polished off his own steak while I was eating rather more delicately. ‘Don’t you want the rest of that?’ he asked. And before I could answer, it was gone."" - Broadcaster John Humphrys, The Things They Say...; The Western Morning News (Plymouth, UK); Dec 8, 2014. “You’re going to have to pace yourself. Nobody likes a gannet, even at a buffet.” - Gareth May; The Ultimate Buffet Etiquette Guide; China Daily (Beijing); July 11, 2015."	
olio /OH-lee-oh/	noun A miscellaneous collection of things, for example, a variety show. [From Spanish olla (pot, stew), from Latin olla (pot). Earliest documented use: 1642. Also see olla podrida.] “I will launch into an olio of malapropisms, bad abbreviations, similar words that tend to be used interchangeably.” - All right, Already! Today You Get Plenty of Options; Daily Herald (Illinois); Sep 13, 2015.	
obstinance	noun 1. The trait of being difficult to handle or overcome. 2. Resolute adherence to your own ideas or desires.	
toenadering /TOO-nah-duhr-ing/	noun Establishing or reestablishing of cordial relations, especially between nations. [From Dutch toenadering (advance, approach), from toe (to) + nader (closer). Earliest documented use: 1920. The term is typically seen in South Africa, but it’s worth adopting everywhere. The French equivalent is rapprochement.] “The party and the labour federation may seem to be on the same page in opposing e-tolling, but don’t hold your breath for a toenadering even on this front.” - Cosatu and DA Lock Horns; The Argus (Cape Town, South Africa); Mar 17, 2012.	
sooterkin /SOO-tuhr-kin/	noun 1. A sweetheart or mistress. 2. An afterbirth formerly believed to be gotten by Dutch women by warming themselves on stoves. 3. Something imperfect or unsuccessful. [Apparently from Dutch zoet (sweet). Earliest documented use: 1530.] “sooterkin, my twin how oft I see you in dark corners of this room so like our early home, a hot dark womb” Alison Calder; Wolf Tree; Coteau Books; 2007. “Dr. Maubray even claimed that he had seen and delivered a sooterkin when he was traveling on a ferry from Harlingen to Amsterdam and a woman fell into labor on board.” - Jan Bondeson; A Cabinet of Medical Curiosities; W.W. Norton; 1999.	
solidus /SOL-i-dus/	noun 1. A slash 2. A gold coin issued in the Late Roman Empire, and a weight for gold more generally, corresponding to 4.5 grams. It was widely propagated in 312 AD by Constantine I and replaced the older Aureus as the main gold denomination.	
anodyne /AN-uh-dyn/	adjective 1. Relieving pain; soothing. 2. Bland or insipid: not likely to provoke or offend. noun 1. Something that soothes or comforts. 2. A medicine that relieves pain. [From Latin anodynos, from Greek anodynos, from a- (not) + odyne (pain). Ultimately from the Indo-European root ed- (to eat, to bite), which also gave us edible, comestible, obese, etch, fret, postprandial, esurient, and edacity. Earliest documented use: 1543.] “The interview, while engaging, was anodyne and strangely emollient, entirely without any edge.” - TV: Shelving the Misery Memoirs; Sunday Business Post (Cork, Ireland); May 18, 2014.	
adventious /ad-VEN-shuhs/	adjective 1. Coming from outside: not inherent or native. 2. Happening by chance. 3. Appearing in an unusual or abnormal place. [A variant spelling of adventitious, from Latin adventicius (coming from without), from advenire (to arrive), from ad- (toward) + venire (to come). Earliest documented use: 1633.] “For the Greenies, the arrival of Musketaquid was almost adventious; they had never known Allston Brighton to have a visitor.” - Randy Steinberg; Concord; AuthorHouse; 2001.	
bathos /BAY-thas, -thos/	noun An abrupt descent from lofty or sublime to the commonplace; anticlimax. [From Greek bathos (depth). Earliest documented use: 1638.] “Yet still there is a notion that real space exploration needs real people. And so we are forced to witness, on the one hand, the bathos of astronauts taking pizza deliveries on the International Space Station, a mere 400km from Earth’s surface -- and on the other, the genuine tragedies of men and women dying in our attempts to put them in space.” - Philip Ball; Philae is Boldly Going Where No Man Should Go -- Let’s Leave Space to the Robots; The Guardian (London, UK); Jun 15, 2015.	
fastuous /FAS-choo-uhs/	adjective 1. Haughty; arrogant. 2. Pretentious. [From Latin fastuosus, from fastus (arrogance). Earliest documented use: 1638.] “Here the gentry live a fastuous life and wear chic clothes.” - Edwin Jahiel; Brotherhood of Wolf Stylish, Confused Mess; News Gazette (Champaign, Illinois); Feb 14, 2002.	
gramarye /GRAM-uh-ree/	noun Occult learning; magic. [From Old French gramaire (grammar, book of magic), from Greek gramma (letter). Ultimately from the Indo-European root gerbh- (to scratch), which also gave us crab, crayfish, carve, crawl, grammar, program, graphite, glamor, anagram, paraph, and graffiti. Earliest documented use: 1320.] “There is naught of the power of gramarye in you. If there were, you would know it.” - Cecilia Dart-Thornton; The Lady of the Sorrows; Pan Macmillan; 2003.	
skookum /SKOO-kuhm/	"adjective Powerful; first-rate; impressive. [From Chinook Jargon, from a Chehalis word meaning spirit or ghost.] ""Beth Baker of Knik may be an Iditarod rookie, but she's a skookum one."" - Opinion; Anchorage Daily News (Alaska); Mar 18, 1994. ""His big seller is the Zooper Buddy, an all-terrain vehicle with three inflatable tires, an adjustable handle bar, amazing suspension and a skookum reclining seat."" - Karen Gram; Stroller Envy; Vancouver Sun (Canada); Oct 21, 2003."	
viridity /vi-RID-i-tee/	noun 1. The quality or state of being green. 2. Youthful innocence. [From Latin viridis (green). Earliest documented use: 1430.] “Penobscot Bay shimmered blue against the viridity of the forested hills in a true postcard moment.” - Mary Ann Anderson; Of Moose and Men: Maine’s Central Coast; Pittsburgh Tribune-Review; Aug 16, 2009.	
quoz /kwaz/	noun An odd person or thing. [Of uncertain origin. Perhaps it’s a variant of the word quiz which has a similar meaning. Or maybe the word quiz is a variant of quoz. It’s all very quizzical. Or quozzical. Earliest documented use: 1780.] “That juggling trick of yours is growing older than a floorboard split under the weight of countless eager feet, and rendering you a quoz to the ears.” - Neil Baker; G Day: Please God, Get Me Off the Hook; AuthorHouse; 2010. “While everything that exists is a potential quoz for somebody, one must embrace the mystery for it to open itself.” - William Least Heat-Moon; Blue Highways: A Journey into America; Little, Brown and Company; 2012.	
vidimus /VAI-di-muhs/	noun 1. An attested copy of a document. 2. An official inspection. [From Latin vidimus (we have seen), from videre (to see). Ultimately from the Indo-European root weid- (to see), which also gave us guide, wise, vision, advice, idea, story, history, vizard, videlicet, prudential, previse, and invidious. Earliest documented use: 1436.] “The final letter was a vidimus bearing the great seal of Philip the Fair, purportedly confirming the marriage contract between Philip of Artois and Blanche of Brittany.” - Margaret Reeves, et al.; Shell Games; CRRS Publications; 2004.	
paternoster /PAY-tuhr NOS-tuhr, PAH-, PAT-/	noun 1. A sequence of words used as a formula, a charm, etc. 2. A continuously moving endless elevator that goes in a loop. 3. The Lord’s Prayer; one of the certain larger beads in a rosary on which the Lord’s Prayer is said. [From Latin pater noster (our father), opening words of the Lord’s Prayer in Latin. Earliest documented use: before 900.] “She trudged doggedly across the last field, inwardly muttering her paternoster.” - Christina Shea; Smuggled: A Novel; Grove/Atlantic; 2011. “We’d ride the open-sided paternoster elevators and giggle at the scare they gave us.” - Mary Helen Dirkx; A Great Adventure in The Shadow of War; Newsweek (New York); Sep 13, 2004.	
mittimus /MIT-uh-muhs/	noun An official order to commit someone to prison. [From Latin mittimus (we send), the first word of such an order, from mittere (to send). Earliest documented use: 1443.] “Problems with the mittimus have recently been blamed in hundreds of errors allowing early releases of inmates, including Ebel and Blecha.” - Kirk Mitchell; Beyond Bars; Denver Post (Colorado); Jun 12, 2013.	
gaudeamus /gau-di-AHM-uhs/	"noun A convivial gathering or merry-making of students at a college or university. [""De Brevitate Vitae"" (Latin: ""On the Shortness of Life""), more commonly known as ""Gaudeamus Igitur"" (""So Let Us Rejoice"") or just ""Gaudeamus"" or ""The Gaudie"" (UK), is a popular academic commercium song in many Western countries. It was known as a beer-drinking song in many ancient universities and is the official song of many schools, colleges, universities, institutions, student societies and is the official anthem of the International University Sports Federation. The song is thought to originate in a Latin manuscript from 1287. and its earliest documented use in 1823.] “I have apologized for not attending the Royal Society Club, who have a gaudeamus on this day.” - The Journal of Sir Walter Scott; Jan 1826."	
debenture /di-BEN-chuhr/	noun A certificate acknowledging a debt. [From Latin debentur (they are due/owing), the first word in early certificates of indebtedness. From Latin debere (to owe), ultimately from the Indo-European root ghabh- (to give or to receive), which is also the source of give, gift, able, habit, prohibit, due, duty, adhibit, and habile. Earliest documented use: 1455.] “‘My dear Violet,’ Allen said, leaning over to be heard, ‘you must recall that Foster’s idea of fun is curling up with a debenture agreement that includes an especially ingenious reordering of priorities in bankruptcy.’” - David O. Stewart; The Wilson Deception; Kensington Books; 2015.	
fissiparous /fi-SIP-uh-ruhs/	"adjective 1. Tending to break into parts. 2. Reproducing by biological fission. [From Latin fissi- (cleft) + -parous (bearing, producing). Earliest documented use: 1835.] ""Some reckon it is even too late to achieve the more modest goals of bringing the fissiparous rebel groups under a single command structure."" - Barack Obama's Tentative Step; The Economist (London, UK); Jun 22, 2013."	
peradventure /pur-ad-VEN-chur/	"adverb Maybe; possibly. noun Uncertainty; doubt. [Peradventure means “uncertainty” or “chance”. Beyond peradventure (sometimes as beyond a peradventure) is a fixed phrase that can pop up from the subconscious of a well-read but stressed person without allowing its owner time to think about whether it would be understood. It may be rendered in everyday English as “beyond question” or “without doubt”. It comes to us from Old French per aventure, by chance. Aventure has had a mildly exotic history. We can trace it back to Latin adventūra, a future form of the verb advenīre, to happen — so something that may occur. By the time it reached Old French it could variously mean destiny or fate, a chance event, an accident, fortune or luck. The sense of aventure that was first taken into English was that of a chance event or accident. The French word also came to be used in English as adventure, also at first for some chance event, but then for a risk of danger or loss. (Marine insurers still sometimes use adventure to mean the time during which insured goods are at risk.) Its sense shifted to a hazardous undertaking or audacious exploit — especially the sort carried out by medieval knights — but much more recently softened to sometimes mean merely a novel or exciting experience.] ""[Philip Coyle, former director of operational test and evaluation at Pentagon] reckons America's chances of shooting down an enemy missile next year, if peradventure it needed to, are 'practically zero'."" - Warding Off Missiles; The Economist (London, UK); Dec 6, 2003."	
selcouth /SEL-kooth/	"adjective Strange; unusual; marvelous. [From Middle English, from Old English seldcuth, from seldan (seldom) + cuth (known), from cunnan (to know).] ""Then forth they rushed: by Leader's tide, A selcouth sight they see."" - Walter Scott (1771-1832); Thomas the Rhymer."	
autolycan /o-TOL-uh-kuhn/	adjective Characterized by thievery or trickery. [From Autolycus, the son of Hermes and Chione in Greek mythology, who was skilled in theft and trickery. He was able to make himself (or things he touched) invisible, which greatly helped him in his trade. Shakespeare named a con artist after Autolycus in A Winter’s Tale. Earliest documented use: 1890.] “In a disarming note at the beginning of the book, Adams offers an apology for his autolycan procedures.” - Times Literary Supplement; Jun 5, 1981. “His art was Autolycan, snapping-up, catching the mean minnows of the commonplace when they were off their guard.” - Anthony Burgess; Tremor of Intent; W.W. Norton; 1966.	
alar /AY-luhr/	adjective 1. Relating to wings; wing-shaped. 2. Relating to the armpit. [From Latin ala (wing), which also gave us aisle and aileron. Earliest documented use: 1791.] “Fred Urquhart began in 1937 to experiment with different ways of marking these delicate insects in order to study their migration patterns, eventually developing and refining the method of applying an alar tag to the monarch’s wing.” - Gerry Rising; A Salute to the King of the Monarch Butterflies; Buffalo News (New York); Dec 16, 1996.	
Gongorism /GONG-uh-riz-uhm/	noun An affected literary style marked by intricate language and elaborate figures of speech. [After Spanish baroque poet Luis de Góngora y Argote (1561-1627). Earliest documented use: 1813. Some Gongorisms from Luis de Góngora y Argote: • La vida es ciervo herido, que las flechas le dan alas. (Life is a wounded stag in whom the fast-stuck arrows function as wings.) • A batallas de amor, campo de pluma. (Feathers are love’s most fitting battle-ground.)] “And the staggering Gongorisms! Shall the ship be called just ‘ship’? Perish the thought of such banality! Oh eyes, no eyes, but fountains fraught with tears!” - Aldous Huxley; Beyond the Mexique Bay; Chatto & Windus; 1934.	
lutestring /LOOT-string/	noun A glossy silk fabric. [This fabric has nothing to do with a lute string. The word is a corruption of French lustrine, from Italian lustrino, from Latin lustrare (to make bright). Ultimately from the Indo-European root leuk- (light), which also gave us lunar, lunatic, light, lightning, lucid, illuminate, illustrate, translucent, lux, lynx, pellucid, lucubrate, limn, levin, and lea. Earliest documented use: 1661.] “Her modish Pomona green lutestring gown, which she’d thought so becoming earlier, now seemed a less than ideal choice.” - Heather Cullman; A Perfect Scoundrel; Signet; 2000.	